1. ABHAYARISHTAM – INGREDIENTS, INDICATIONS, USES AND BENEFITS
INTRODUCTION
It is a classical ayurvedic formulation. It is named abhayarishtam, where abhaya is a synonym of haritaki which is the main ingredient of this formulation. It is effective in gastrointestinal ailments such as piles, constipation, etc.

INGREDIENTS
Kwatha dravya
Haritaki phala twak (Terminalia chebula) – 5 kg
Munakka / draksha (Vitis vinifera) – 2500 gm
Vayavidanga (Embelia ribes) – 500 gm
Madukapushpa (Madhuca indica) – 500 gm
Water – 52 litres
Prakshepak dravya
Guda – 5 kg
Gokhru (Tribulus terrestris) – 100 gm
Trivrit (Operculina turpethum) – 100 gm
Dhaniya beej (Coriandrum sativum) – 100 gm
Dhatakipushpa (Woodfordia fruticosa) – 100 gm
Indravaruni (Citrullus colocynthis) – 100 gm
Chavayamool (Piper retrofractum) – 100 gm
Saunf (Foeniculum vulgare) – 100 gm
Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) – 100 gm
Dantimool (Baliospermum montanum) – 100 gm
Mochrasa (Moringa oleifera) – 100 gm
BENEFITS OF INGREDIENTS
HARITAKI – It is an herb which pacifies pitta due to its sweet, astringent and pungent rasa, pacifies Vata dosha due to its sour and sweet properties, and pacifies kapha dosha due to its bitter, astringent and pungent taste. It can be used in the treatment of skin diseases like leprosy, erysipelas, etc., chronic fever, cardiac diseases, gout, diabetes, retention of urine, etc.
MUNAKKA – It is a herb used as a dietary supplement as well as tackles diseases. It is beneficial in bleeding disorders, constipation, fever, burning sensation, anaemia, etc.
VAYAVIDANGA – This herb is known as a potent ant parasitic agent. Due to its hot, pungent, astringent properties it pacifies kapha and vata dosha thus effective in parasitic infestations, skin infections, etc.
MADUKA PUSHPA – The flowers of this herb are mainly vata and pitta dosha pacifier. It acts as laxative and expectorant.
METHOD OF PREPARATION
Above mentioned kwatha dravyas are firstly powdered.
Then decoction is made by boiling in 52 litters of water till it reduced to ¼ th, strain it into a new earthen pot.
In earthen pot finely powdered 9 prakshepak dravyas should be added.
Now, the mouth of the earthen pot is covered with a lid (sharava) and air tightened it with the help of cloth and mud (kapadmitti) and then place it in a vacuumed room.
At the base of the earthen pot mattress of bhussi / puyaal is made which prevents the earthen pot from breakdown.
After 21 days of fermentation, its mouth should be opened and liquid content is again mixed thoroughly and then strained with the help of a cloth.
Now this strained content should be filled in another pot, keep it for 8 to 10 days and clear liquid portion is poured in another container.
It should be used after one year.
INDICATIONS
Piles
Sprue
Aneamia
Skin disease
Ascites
Swelling
Fever
Splenomegaly
Emaciation
Heart diseases
Vomiting
In worms
USES AND BENEFITS OF ABHAYARISHTAM
It can be used in the treatment of various types of skin diseases such as leprosy, eczema, scabies, etc.
 It is beneficial in relieving constipation which is a root cause of many other ailments.
It can be used in the treatment of all types of abdominal disorders such as ascites, intestinal perforation, etc.
It is useful in all kinds of piles such as bleeding, non- bleeding and prolapsed ones
DOSAGE
12 to 25 ml according to age, region, disease, digestion power, etc.

ANUPANA: With the equal quantity of water

COLOUR: Reddish black liquid.

TASTE: Sweet sharp and astringent.

ODOUR: Like alcohol.

PACKING: 450 ml

MANUFACTURERS
Arya vaidya pharmacy.

2. Amritarishta (Amrutharishtam) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Jvaradhikara
Introduction
Amritarishta belongs to arishta preparations. Ancient texts in regards to arishta were present.

It says:-
“Na Risahyateya Iti Arishta.“

It states that these do not get spoil easily.

Amritarishta is known to be self-generated alcohol having dark brown color. It is a fermented liquid contains alcohol I the range of 5 to 10%. This is also known with the names of Amritarishta and Amrutharishtam. It contains Giloy as a main ingredient herb.

It contain active chemicals like alkaloids, polyphenol and more tends to show anti-diabetic, digestive, anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-aging, blood cleanser, respiratory and anti-bacterial properties.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Water for decoction			49.152 liters
Ingredient of Sandhana dravya (Fermentative agents)
2.	Guda (Jaggery)			14.400 kg
Ingredients of Kvatha drvya (herbs for decoction)
3.	Guduchi	Tinospora cordifolia	Stem	4.800 kg
4.	Gokshura	Tribulus terrestris	Plant	480 g
5.	Gambhari	Gmelina arborea	Root	480 g
6.	Prishnaparni	Uraria picta	Plant	480 g
7.	Shyonaka	Oroxylum indicum	Root	480 g
8.	Agnimantha	Premna mucronata	Stem Bark	480 g
9.	Kantakari	Solanum surattense	Plant	480 g
10.	Brihati	Solanum melongena	Plant	480 g
11.	Shalaparni	Desmodium gangeticum	Whole Plant	480 g
12.	Bilva	Aegle marmelos	Stem Bark/Root	480 g
13.	Patala	Stereospermum suaveolens	Stem Bark	480 g
Ingredients of Prakshepa dravyas (Herbal additives for aroma and for accelerating process of fermentation)
14.	Maricha	Piper nigrum	Fruit	48 g
15.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea	Stamen	48 g
16.	Musta	Cyperus rotundus		48 g
17.	Shunthi	Zingiber officinale	Rhizome	48 g
18.	Pippali	Piper longum	Fruit	48 g
19.	Saptacchada	Alstonia scholaris	Stem Bark	48 g
20.	Katuki	Picrorrhiza kurroa	Rhizome	48 g
21.	Prativisha	Aconitum heterophyllum	Root	48 g
22.	Indrayava	Holarrhena antidysenterica	Seed	48 g
23.	Parpata	Fumaria parviflora	Plant	96 g
24.	Sveta jiraka	Cuminum cyminum	Fruit	768 g
Method of Preparation
Took all the raw materials with proper quantity.
Take the ingredients of Kvatha dravya – Guduchi, Gokshura, Gambhari, Prishniparni, Shyonaka, Patala, Agnimantha, Brihati, Kantakari, Shalaparni and Bilva. Wash, dry, grind the herbs in powder form. Pass through the 44 number sieve to obtain coarse powder.
Now clean, wash, dry and powder the ingredients of Prakshepa dravya – Nagakeshara, Musta, Marica, Saptacchada, Katuka, Shunthi, Pippali, Prativisha, Indrayava, Parpata, Sveta jiraka and pass through 85 sieve number for powder formation.
Add water to the kvatha dravya and soak for overnight, heat and reduced up to its one fourth volume and filter through muslin cloth to collect kvatha.
Now add Guda (Jaggery) to the filtrate kvatha, dissolve properly and then filtrate.
Transfer to a clean container and add powder Prakshepa to it. Now seal the container mouth.
Place the container in fermentation room and fermented the mixture.
Upon completion, filtrate the fermented material through muslin cloth.
Now pack in air tight container and keep at cool place.
Dosage
Adults – 15 to 30 ml
Children – 5 to 10 ml
Take this with equal quantity of plain water, should be taken two times a day and after meals.
Indications
All kinds of fevers like viral fevers, fever due to liver diseases, chikengunya and typhoid etc.
Anemia
Loss of appetite
Chronic pruritus
Indigestion
Liver diseases
Contraindications
High dose can cause irritation in gastro intestinal tract.
Avoid in pregnancy.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.

3.ARAVINDASAVAM – INGREDIENTS, INDICATIONS, USES AND BENEFITS
INTRODUCTION
Aravindasavam is an Ayurvedic formulation prepared by the fermentation process. This herbal remedy is used to increase digestion power and improves strength in children. It is used as a general tonic for all children’s problems. It is usually the first choice of medicine for children.

INGREDIENTS
Aravinda ( Nelumbo nucifera) – 46gm
Usheera ( Vetiveria zizanioides) – 46gm
Gambhari ( Gmelina arborea) – 46gm
Neel Utpala ( Nymphaea stellata) – 46gm
Manjishta ( Rubia cordifolia) – 46gm
Choti elaichi ( Elettaria cardamomum) – 46gm
Bala ( Sida cordifolia) – 46gm
Jatamansi ( Nardostachys jatamansi) – 46gm
Musta ( Cyperus rotundus) – 46gm
Sariva ( Hemidesmus indicus) – 46gm
Haritaki ( Terminalia chebula) – 46gm
Vibhitaki ( Terminalia bellirica) – 46gm
Vacha ( Acorus calamus) – 46gm
Amalaki ( Embilica officinalis) – 46gm
Shati ( Hedychium spicatum) – 46gm
Priyangu ( Callicarpa macrophylla) – 46gm
Neelimool ( Indigofera tinctoria) – 46gm
Patola ( Trichosanthes dioica)- 46gm
Pitpapda ( Fumaria parviflora) – 46gm
Arjuna ( Terminalia arjuna) –46gm
Madhuka ( Madhuca indica)- 46gm
Yashti madhu ( Glycyrrhiza glabra) – 46gm
Mura ( Selinium tenuifolium) – 46 gm
Draksa ( Vitis vinifera) – 940gm
Dhataki ( Woodfordia fruticosa) – 750 gm
water – 25 litres
Sugar
Honey – 2335 gm
Jaggery – 4670gm
BENEFITS OF INGREDIENTS
Aravinda (Nelumbo nucifera) – The flowers of this plant are highly beneficial in the treatment of gastric ulcers as it soothes gastrointestinal lining. It is also useful to aid digestion.
Usheera (Vetiveria zizanioides) – Usheera helps to normal down digestive problems. Due to its cool potency, it is used in a burning sensation.
Gambhari (Gmelina arborea) – Gambhari is one among Dashamoola group of herbs (group of ten roots). The bark of this herb is laxative and used in the treatment of indigestion and constipation.
Utpala (Nymphaea stellata) – Utpala is a potential herb used in Ayurvedic medicines. It is used in the treatment of urinary tract disorders and considered as a bitter tonic.
Manjishta (Rubia cordifolia) – Manjishta is considered as a best blood purifier in Ayurveda. It also helps to maintain good digestion.
Choti elaichi (Elettaria cardamomum) – Elaichi is a good digestive stimulant and carminative in nature. According to Ayurveda, Elaichi has an influence on all three doshas. It balances tridosha in the body, so it is an important ingredient of this asvam.
Bala (Sida cordifolia) – It is used for boosting physical stamina and immunity power.
Jatamansi (Nardostachys jatamansi) – This herb acts as a stimulant and bitter tonic. It regulates nervous system functions and used to promote growth in children.
Musta (Cyperus rotundus) – Musta is used in treating digestive system disorders such as diarrhoea, fever and dyspepsia.
Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus) – Sariva is madhur ( Sweet) in taste and helps to improve digestion and anorexia. In children, it acts as a rejuvenating agent.
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) – Haritaki is found to be rich in vitamin c and it has anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects. Terminalia chebula is a rejuvenating, expectorant and appetite stimulator.
Vibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica) – It has astringent properties hence highly beneficial in maintaining the gut flora. The fruits of this herb are also immune modulator in nature.
Vacha (Acorus calamus) – This herb has emetic, laxative, stomachic, diuretic, aphrodisiac, anti-convulsant, anti-inflammatory.
Amalaki (Embilica officinalis) – Amalaki is a rich source of vitamin c and fibers. It is best used for any digestion related problem.
Shati (Hedychium spicatum) – This herb is effective in the treatment of swelling and indigestion.

Priyangu ( Callicarpa macrophylla) – Priyangu is sheetla ( Cold), tikta (Bitter) that helps to manage delusion, burning sensation, fever, vomiting and dyspepsia. It pacifies pitta dosha in the body.
Neelimool (Indigofera tinctoria) – Neel mool is used in treating skin disorders and urinary tract infections.
Patola (Trichosanthes dioica) – Patola is an herb used to improve the digestive power of the body. It has anti-inflammatory properties.
Pitpapda (Fumaria parviflora) – Pitpapda is an effective herb used in fever, aggravated Pitta conditions. It is also used in the treatment of fever, gastritis, diarrhoea, burning sensation and dyspepsia.
Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna) – The extraction of Arjuna helps to support digestive health. It has anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties.
Madhuka ( Madhuca indica) – This herb is sweet and pungent in nature and it provides nourishment and also strengthens the body.
Yashti madhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra) – Yashtimadhu provides strength to the body as it helps to boost immunity.
Mura (Selinium tenuifolium) – Mura is an Ayurvedic herb useful in the treatment of digestive ailments.
Draksha (Vitis vinifera) – Draksha is sweet in taste and it is mild laxative in nature. It nourishes the body and enhances the immunity power of body.
Dhataki (Woodfordia fruticosa) – Dhataki flowers of this plant are used for fermentation purpose.
METHOD OF PREPARATION
All the above ingredients are taken in powder form and they are mixed with water, jaggery and honey and this mixture is kept in a mud vessel for one month. The mud vessel is kept in a room and after one month this mixture is filtered and transferred into glass bottles for further use.

INDICATIONS
This herbal formulation is used in children to enhance their growth. It is an effective remedy that we can utilize in all the diseases of Children

USES AND BENEFITS OF ARAVINDASAVAM
This herbal liquid remedy is used in children’s problems like to gain weight and body strength. It is also used to treat the psychological disorders of children like crying without reason.

CONTRAINDICATION
This herbal remedy should not be given on an empty stomach, as it can cause ulcer formation.

DOSAGE
7 to 10 Drops as advised by the Physician
MANUFACTURER
Arya Vaidya Pharmacy


4. Parthadyarishta (Arjunarishta)
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Hrudroga Adhikara 33/75-77 (For Heart disease)
Introduction
Parthadyarishta (Arjunarishta) is an Ayurvedic liquid form medicine which is commonly used as herbal heart tonic. Arjunarishta have 6 – 12 % of self-generated alcohol in it. This self-generated alcohol and the water in this herbal product work as a channel to deliver water and alcohol dissolved active herbal components to the body. It is also known by other name as Partharishtam, Parthadyarishtam, etc.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Arjuna tvak	Terminalia arjuna	Stem bark	4.8 kg
2.	Mrudvika (Dry grapes)	Vitis vinifera	Fruit	2.4 kg
3.	Madhuka	Madhuca indica	Flower	960 g
4.	Water			49.152 liters
5.	Dhataki	Woodfodia fruticosa	Flower	960 g
6.	Guda (Jaggery)			4.8 kg
Dosage
Its dose must be 12 – 24 ml. once or twice daily, recommended usually after food. If required it can be mixed with equal quantity of water.

Method of Preparation
These ingredients Arjuna tvak, Mrudvika, Madhuka are used in coarse powdered form and added with 49.152 liters of water. Then this mixture is boiled and reduced to 12.288 liters and filtered. It is further added with powders of Dhataki, Guda and is kept for fermentation. After confirmation that fermentation is over, their contents are filtered and stored in air tight containers.

Storage
It is stored in a cool place within a tightly closed amber colored bottle and is protected from light and moisture.

Therapeutic Uses
Parthadyarishta extensively used as herbal cardiac tonic as well is useful in Lung diseases.

It strengthens the heart muscles and thus improves the efficiency of Heart.
It is rich in properties that make it to improve strength and help to cleanse intestines.
Also useful in the treatment of Chest injury.
It is also helpful in improving the capacity and strength of lungs.
Good in getting rid of weakness, fatigue and debility.
Provides energy when one is Feeling tired all the time.
Beneficial in Chronic respiratory distress.
Useful herbal remedy in case of Throat related diseases.
It can control mild to moderate hypertension.
This Ayurvedic medicine is capable of curing anemia.
Contraindications
There are no known side effects of Arjunarishta, as long as it is taken under professional advice and supervision.
It is safe to use this medicine in lower dose, in children above 5 years of age.
In pregnancy self-medication should be avoided. It is best to have it only under medical supervision.
During lactation period also it must be taken under doctor’s advice and that too for a short period of time.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


5. Ashokarishta (Asokarishtam) – Ashokarishta Uses, Benefits, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Strirogadhikara (Gynaecological problems)
Introduction of Ashokarishta
Ashokarishta is an Ayurvedic formulation, formed through fermentation. Ashokarishta contains self-generated alcohol 5 to 10 percent. It is effective for all kinds of female reproductive health problems. This liquid is somewhat of sweet astringent taste. The main ingredient in this formulation is herb Ashoka (Saraca asoca). This is known as a holy tree in Indian Hindu culture. The plant has properties of being anti-arthritis, useful for gynecological health, stimulatory, diuretic, anti-inflammatory, detoxifying and pain relieving.


Ashokarishta Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Jaggery			9.600 kg
2.	Water for decoction			49.152 litres
3.	Ashoka	Saraca asoca	Stem Bark	4.800 kg
Prakshepa dravyas (Herbal additives for aroma and for accelerating process of fermentation)
4.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	Flower	768 g
5.	Haritaki	Terminalia chebula	Pericarp	48 g
6.	Shunthi	Zingiber officinale	Rhizome	48 g
7.	Amalaki	Emblica officinalis	Pericarp	48 g
8.	Shveta chandana	Santalum album	Heart Wood	48 g
9.	Vasa	Adhatoda vasica	Root	48 g
10.	Darvi	Berberis aristata	Stem	48 g
11.	Musta	Cyperus rotundus	Rhizome	48 g
12.	Bibhitaki	Terminalia bellerica	Pericarp	48 g
13.	Amrasthi	Mangifera indica	Endosperm	48 g
14.	Utpala	Nymphaea stellate	Flower	48 g
15.	Svetajiraka	Cuminum cyminum	Fruit	48 g
16.	Jiraka	Cuminum cyminum	Root	48 g
Method of Preparation Ashokarishta – How to Prepate Ashokarishta
Take herb Ashoka wash, dry and get it in coarse powder form.
Next step is to made water decoction of Ashoka stem bark by using relevant amount of water.
Place the decoction in the fermentation vessel.
Dissolve jaggery in the mixture, boil it and then filter.
Now take the ingredients of Prakshepa dravyas, wash and dry them. Make fine powder of these and add to the decoction.
Now cover the mouth of container with a lid and keep a constant temperature to accelerate the fermentation process.
After the completion of fermentation, fluid is pour out and strain after three days. Again the liquid get strain when the particles settle down.
Now the formulation is prepared, keep it in a tight container, at cool place and keep it away from moisture and light.
Ashokarishta Dosage
15 to 25 ml twice a day with equal quantity of water.
In heavy periods, women should start taking one week before menses (periods) and stop till last day of periods.
This medicine can be taken for 4 to 8 weeks.
Ashokarishta Indications
Piles
Female hormonal problems
Female reproduction system related problems such as pain in female genital tract, leucorrhea (irregular white discharge from female genitals).
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
Polyuria
Fever
Inflammation
Menstrual cramps
Female menstrual problems
Contraindications
Avoid its use if menstrual problems continue in a long run.
Use under medical supervision during lactation.
Avoid during pregnancy.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.

6. Ashwagandharishta – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Murcha Rogadhikara (For anxiety and low energy in body)
Introduction
Ashwagandharishta is a fermented herbal formulation of dark brown color contains self-generated alcohol 5 to 10 percent. It is known as great medicine for neurological and mental problems. The main ingredient of this herbal formulation is Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera). Word Ashwagandha stands for the smell of a horse. This name of the herb is due to its root which smells like a horse urine. Its roots are loaded with fruitful chemical compounds like alkaloids, lactones, phytosterols, saponins and more. These provide plant the properties such as liver and reproductive tonic, anti-tumor, adaptogenic, sedative, anti-inflammatory, nervine, aphrodisiac, anti-anemic, immune-modulatory and analgesic.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Water for decoction			98.304 litres
2.	Honey (Madhu)			14.400 kg
Kvatha dravyas (herbs for decoction)
3.	Ashvagandha	Withania somnifera	Root	2.400 kg
4.	Musali	Chlorophytum tuberosum	Root	960 g
5.	Vidari	Pueraria tuberosa	Root Trace	480 g
6.	Arjuna	Terminalia arjuna	Stem Bark	480 g
7.	Manjishtha	Rubia cordifolia	Root	480 g
8.	Mulethi	Glycyrrhiza glabra	Root	480 g
9.	Haridra	Curcuma longa	Rhizome	480 g
10.	Mustaka	Cyperus rotundus	Rhizome	480 g
11.	Daruharidra	Berberis aristata	Stem	480 g
12.	Trivrit	Ipomoea turpethum	Root	480 g
13.	Rasna	Pluchea lanceolata	Root/Leaf	480 g
14.	Haritaki	Terminalia chebula	Pericarp	480 g
15.	Vacha	Acorus calamus	Rhizome	384 g
16.	Chitraka	Plumbago zeylanica	Root	384 g
17.	Rakta chandana	Pterocarpus santalinus	Root	384 g
18.	Krishna sariva	Cryptolepis buchanani	Root	384 g
19.	Shveta chandana	Santalum album	Heart Wood	384 g
20.	Shveta sariva	Hemidesmus indicus	Root	384 g
Prakshepa dravyas (Herbal additives for aroma and for accelerating process of fermentation)
21.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	Flower	768 g
22.	Priyangu	Callicarpa macrophylla	Flower	192 g
23.	Ela (Sukshmaila)	Elettaria cardamomum	Seed	192 g
24.	Tvak	Cinnamomum verum	Stem Bark	192 g
25.	Patra (Tejapatra)	Cinnamomum tamala	Leaf	192 g
26.	Shunthi	Zingiber officinale	Rhizome	96 g
27.	Maricha	Piper nigrum	Fruit	96 g
28.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea	Stamen	96 g
29.	Pippali	Piper longum	Fruit	96 g
Method of Preparation
Take the ingredients of kvatha dravyas (Decoction herbs), wash, dry and convert them in to boorish powder from by passing it through the 44 number sieve.
Next take the ingredients of Prakshepa dravya except Dhataki (Woodfordia fruticosa) clean, clear and get in a powder form by passing through 85 number sieve individually.
Add specific amount of water to kvatha dravya (Decoction herbs), soak whole night and heat up to its one fourth volume. Then filter it through muslin cloth.
Now add Dhataki (Woodfordia fruticosa) and honey. Seal the container mouth and ferment the mixture.
After its completion, filtrate the fermented material and pour in an air tight container.
Keep in a cool and place free from moisture and light.
Dosage
10 to 20 ml with equal quantity of water, one to two times a day after meals.

Indications
Fatigue
Malnourishment
Depression
Anorexia
Sleeplessness
Neurological problems – migraine, vertigo, memory loss and loss of neurons in brain
Joint problems – inflammation in joints, osteoarthritis
Male and female infertility
Erectile dysfunction
Uterine weakness
Contraindications
Avoid to use in case of infants and pregnancy.
Sour throat
Ulcers in mouth
Heartburn
Stomach irritation


7. Balarishta
Reference – Bhaisajya Ratnavali, Vatvyadhirogadhikaar 26/572-575
Introduction
Balarishta is a classical polyherbal fermented formulation, which is having balya guna (strengthening properties- both physically and mentally). The main ingredient of this formulation is Bala (Sida cordifolia), and it has restorative action that improves body strength and nourishes organs. It has vata pacifying properties. Balarishta also has some ingredients that help in improving liver functions and digestion.

Ingredients
Balarishta is the classical fermented formulation. It contains multiple ingredients which include:-

Bala (Sida cordifolia) – 5 kg
Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) – 5 kg
Dhataki (Woodfordia fruticosa) – 750 grams
Ksheera Kakoli (Fritillaria roylei) – 93 grams
Eranda (Ricinus communis) – 93 grams
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata) – 46 grams
Elaichi (Elettaria cardamomum) – 46 grams
Gandhprasarini (Paederia foetida) – 46 grams
Laung (Syzygium aromaticum) – 46 grams
Ushira (Vetiveria zizanioides) – 46 grams
Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris) – 46 grams
Gudd (Jaggery) – 15 kg
Method of Preparation
Take the raw ingredients in the appropriate quantity. Initially the coarse powder of Bala & Ashwagandha are added to the water, then boiled and filtered. Then the jaggery is added to the decoction, and the decoction is filtered again for impurities. Add the rest of the ingredient and keep the mixture in the closed container for one month. After this process of fermentation the medicine obtained is kept in another airtight container.

Medicinal Properties
The balarishta is well known for the treatment of various vata disorders (neurological diseases). It’s ingredients are one of the best nervine tonics. It has properties like balbardhana (improving strength), agni vardhana (improves the digestion strength), pushtivardhanam (nourishes the body), promotes the strength of joints and bones, excellent analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties. This formulation is having anti-inflammatory, nervine tonic, neuroprotective, anodyne, cardioprotective, restorative and strengthening for nerves, mild diuretic, anti-stress, anti-paralytic, adaptogenic, rasayana (rejuvenating), appetizer and digestive stimulant.

Indications
Balarishta is indicated in following diseases:-

Vataj disorders such as paraplegia, hemiplegia, neuralgia, spondylosis, etc, avascular necrosis, etc.
General weakness, physical & mental
Mental debility
Paralysis
Hemiplegia
Paraplegia
Facial Paralysis
Sciatic nerve pain
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Headache
Nasal Congestion
Bronchitis
Erectile Dysfunction (ED)
Asthma
Cough
Breathing problems
Tuberculosis
Diabetes and kidney related disorders.
Loss of strength,and immune deficiency conditions.
Dosage
10-20 ml with equal amounts of water, twice daily after meals.

Contraindications
Use of this formulation of an empty stomach is contraindicated.
It is best to avoid use of balarishta in the patients with chronic gastritis issues.
Side Effects
There is no side effect of this formulation with the recommended dosage of Balarishtam, but it can cause burning sensation in people with already gastric issues if taken in excess dosage or without water.


8. Chandanasava (Chandanasavam) – Benefits, Uses, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Prameha Rogadhikar, Chapter 37-38
Introduction
Chandanasava (Chandanasavam) is an Ayurvedic formulation used for kidney and urinary disorders. It is an Ayurvedic wine preparation as it has 5-10% of self-generated alcohol. It is very beneficial to cure burning urination, UTI, Dysuria, Renal calculi, Kidney failure and Gonorrhea.

It is traditionally used as a treatment for nightfall. It also provides strength, nourishment, as a cardiac tonic and improves digestion also.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Quantity
1.	Sandalwood	Santalum album	48 g
2.	Balaka root	Pavonia odorata	48 g
3.	Musta	Cyperus rotundus	48 g
4.	Gambhari	Gmelina arborea	48 g
5.	Nilotpala	Nymphea stellata	48 g
6.	Priyangu	Callicarpa macrophylla	48 g
7.	Padmaka	Prunus poddum	48 g
8.	Lodhra	Symplocos racemosa	48 g
9.	Manjishta	Rubia cordifolia	48 g
10.	Raktachandana	Pterocarpus marsupium	48 g
11.	Patha	Cyclea peltata	48 g
12.	Kiratatikta	Swertia chiraita	48 g
13.	Nyagrodha	Ficus benghalensis	48 g
14.	Pippali	Piper longum	48 g
15.	Madhuka	Madhuka longifolia	48 g
16.	Rasna	Pluchea lanceolata	48 g
17.	Patol	Trichosanthes dioica	48 g
18.	Kanchanara	Bauhinia variegata	48 g
19.	Amratvak	Mangifera indica	48 g
20.	Mocharasa	Bombax malabaricum	48 g
21.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	768 g
22.	Draksha (Raisins)	Vitis vinifera	960 g
23.	Sharkara (sugar)	Sugar candy	4.8 kg
24.	Jaggery (Guda)	–	2.4 kg
25.	Water	–	24.576 liters
Method of Preparation
The sugar and Jaggery are first mixed in water, dissolved and filtered. The remaining ingredients are taken in the form of a coarse powder and added to the pot of water. These ingredients should be stirred well. The vessel is then sealed and kept away for a month. The self-generated alcohol is observed and filtered. Finally in the end product is stored in air tight jars.

Dosage
The asava should be taken in a quantity of 15-25 ml mixed with equal quantity of water after meals twice a day.

Indications
It is useful for the following disorders:-
UTI
Pyospermia
Renal calculi
Dysuria
Burning micturition
Gonorrhea
Cystitis
Chronic kidney failure
Night fall
Strength
Digestion
Contradictions
Chandanasava has no reported Contradictions. But it should be avoided in pregnancy or to take under doctor’s supervision.


9. Dashamula Panchakoladi Kashayam
Reference – Sahasrayoga Kashayaprakarana.
Introduction
Dashamula Panchakoladi Kashayam is an ayurvedic formulation that is known to contain mixture of effective herbs. This is known to contain dashmoola – refers to ten roots, Panchakola – known to contain five herbs and some other herbs.

Ingredients
Dashamoola – known to contain following ten herb roots:-
Gambhari – Gmelina arborea
Shyonaka – Oroxylum indicum
Shalaparni – Desmodium gangeticum
Brihati – Solanum indicum
Kantakari – Solanum xanthocarpum
Gokshura – Tribulus terrestris
Prishnaparni – Uraria picta
Bilva – Aegle marmelos
Agnimantha – Premna mucronata
Patala – Stereospermum suaveolens
Panchakola – known to contain following herbs:
Nagara – Zingiber officinalis
Pippali – Piper longum
Chitraka – Plumbago zeylanica
Chavya – Piper chaba
Pippalimoola – Long pepper root
Triphala – known to contain following three herbs:
Vibhitaki – Terminalia bellirica
Haritaki – Terminalia chebula
Amla – Emblica officinalis
Trivrit – Operculina turpethum
Danti – Baliospermum montanum
Method of Preparation
Take all the herbs and put in a pot or container.
Now add the water in the container and boil the water.
Boil the water till it is reduced up to its one-fourth level.
Filter after the boiling process and decoction is prepared.
Dose
12 to 24 ml, before food, two times a day, with equal amount of water.

Indications
Ascites
Dropsy
Purgation
Contraindications
Over dose can cause diarrhea and gastritis problem.
Avoid in dehydrated conditions.
Take under medical prescription.

10. Draksharishta (Draksharishtam) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Sharangadhara Samhita, Madhyamakhanda
Introduction
Draksharishta is an herbal medicine primarily used in the treatment of respiratory and intestinal diseases. Draksha can also be called raisins or dry grapes, which is the main ingredient of this formulation. Draksharishta contains 5-10 percent self-generated alcohol. The self-generated alcohol and water present in the formulation act as a media to deliver the active herbal substances to the body. Draksharishta is used in respiratory disorders like cold, cough, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), chest injuries.

Draksharishta is one of those uncommon Ayurvedic formulations which improve strength and increase digestive power and promote bowel movements. Draksharishta also acts as an intestine cleanser. It effectively relieves gastritis and hyperacidity also. Draksharishta cures Pitaj disorders also.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Quantity
Kwatha Dravya (Herbs for decoction)
1.	Draksha/raisin	Vitis vinifera	2.400 kg
Sandhana Dravya (Fermentative agents)
2.	Jaggery (guda)		9.600kgs
3.	Water for decoction		49.152 litres
Prakshepa dravyas (Herbal additives for aroma and for accelerating process of fermentation)
4.	Tvak	Cinnamomum verum	48 g
5.	Ela/green cardamom	Elettaria cardamomum	48 g
6.	Patra	Cinnamomum tamala	48 g
7.	Nagkeshra	Mesua ferrea	48 g
8.	Priyangu	Callicarpa macrophylla	48 g
9.	Maricha	Piper nigrum	48 g
10.	Pippali	Piper longum	48 g
11.	Vidanga	Embelia ribes	48 g
12.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	384 g
Method of Preparation
Wash and crush the given amount of Draksha. Thoroughly clean the Prakshepa dravyas separately and obtain a fine powder. Add the given amount of water to the Kwatha Dravya, and let it soak overnight, boil till it is reduced to ¼, then slowly and gradually filter it with a muslin cloth to obtain the decoction. Add the given amount of Jaggery to the decoction; allow dissolving completely and filtering with a muslin cloth. Transfer the filtered substance to a clean container and add the Prakshepa Dravyas and stir well and seal the container and move it to the fermentation room and regularly check for the signs of conclusion till the fermentation process is actually done. Now, store the final product in an amber-hued bottle and keep it in a cool, dark and moisture-free place.

Dosage
It should be taken in a quantity of 15 to 25 ml mixed with an equal amount of water after meals twice every day.
Children over 5 years can consume this formulation in a lesser amount.
Properties
Draksharishta amazing medicinal properties like being a potent antioxidant and good in vitamin C, provide essential nutrients and strengthen the immune system which helps in maintaining the healthy body by getting rid of diseases.

It is suitable for managing symptoms that happens due to respiratory infections like cold, cough, blood purification and general weakness.

It is good to use in sinusitis also. It relieves the problem of nose block, running nose, persistent sneezing, headache, and fever. It can manage the chest injuries. It is helpful in the quick healing of the affected part and restores the functions of the lungs.

It is a useful Ayurvedic remedy for asthma which is effective in diminishing the shortness of breath, and wheezing and prevents its recurrent attacks.

It brings about positive effects in managing digestive problems and stimulates the bowel movements. It helps to empty of intestinal which leads to the elimination of toxic substances from the body. Useful in treating hyperacidity and give lessens the symptoms of gastritis like heartburn, pain in the epigastric region, nausea, vomiting, and headache.

Indications
Weak digestion
Asthma
Cough
Dyspnoea
Chest injuries
Lung disorders
As a laxative
Lack of strength
Throat diseases
Contraindications
It should be avoided during pregnancy and lactation period or consumed under medical supervision. Over dosage is also discouraged.


11.Balajeerakadi Kwath
Reference: Sahasrayoga kashaya prakarana 108
Balajeerakadi Kwath is a very famous Ayurvedic medicine in liquid form. It is also known as Balajirakadi kashaya. This medicine is used in the treatment of respiratory conditions like bronchial asthma, cough, cold etc.

Ingredients
Bala – Sida cordifolia
Jiraka – Cumin seeds – Cuminum cyminum
Bilva – Aegle marmelos
Musta – Cyperus rotundus
Vrishamoola – Root of Adhatoda vasica
Ginger – Zingiber officinalis
Suradruma – Cedrus deodara
Guha – Oryza sativa
Ikshu – Sugarcane
Laja – Parched grain.
Method of Preparation
All the above mentioned ingredients are added with 8 parts of water. It is boiled until reduced to quarter part to make the balajeerakadi kwath.

Dosage
Take 12 – 24 ml, before food two times a day or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.
It is usually advised to add equal amount of water to the kashayam (decoction).
Honey is usually advised as a co drink along with this medicine.
Indications
Bronchial asthma
Cough
Cold
Gastritis
Side Effects
There are no known side effects with this medicine.


12. Kanakasava
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Hikkashvasadhikara (For managing hiccups and Asthma)
Introduction
Kanakasava is a herbal formulation generally used to treat respiratory disorders and is also anti- pyretic. It comprises of 5-10 percent self-generated alcohol. Kanakasava is also commonly used to cure respiratory conditions such as asthma, fever, cough and bleeding diseases. It also acts as a bronchodilator and natural mucolytic. Kanakasava also helps to treat chronic fever, injuries and bleeding disorders. It is also useful to relieve mucous congestion in chest.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Quantity
Kwatha Dravyas (Herbs for decoction)
1.	Dhatura	Datura metel	192 g
2.	Vasa	Adhatoda zeylanica	192 g
3.	Mulethi	Glycyrhhiza glabra	96 g
4.	Pippali	Piper longum	96 g
5.	Kantakari	Solanum indicum	96 g
6.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea	96 g
7.	Shunthi	Zingiber officinale	96 g
8.	Bharngi	Clerodendrum serratum	96 g
9.	Talisapatra	Abies webbiana	96 g
Prakshepa Dravyas [Herbal additives for aroma and for accelerating process of fermentation]
10.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	768 g
11.	Draksha	Vitis vinifera	960 g
Sandhana Dravyas [Fermentative agents]
12.	Sugar		4.800 kgs
13.	Honey		2.400 kgs
14.	Water for decoction		24.576 litres
Method of Preparation
Clean and dry the Kwatha Dravyas as well as the Pakshepa Dravyas and add it to 24.576 litres. Let it settle for some time and filter it with a muslin cloth. Transfer the filtered product to a clean jar and add prakshepa dravyas and other coarsely powdered drugs. Now, seal the jar and move it to the fermentation room and regularly observe the signs of fermentation. When the process is completed, the contents are filtered and stored in an amber colored bottle away from light and moisture.

Properties of Kanakasava
Use of this Ayurvedic medicine is quite effective to resolve the respiratory complications. Expectorant and decongestant properties of this medicine help to remove the mucous, phlegm from airy way, nasal channels, lungs etc. In the case of asthma, this medicine helps to manage the problems like narrowing of air ways, bronchial congestion. It also helps to alleviate the problems of shortness of breath by increasing the lungs capacity for oxygen intake. Antimicrobial properties of this medicine are quite helpful to fight against the various viral, bacterial and fungal infections. Kanakasava helps to enhance the immunity and maintains the good health of overall body. Use of this medicine is quite helpful to provide relief in heavy cough. This Ayurvedic medicine supports the good health of lungs. In the case of tuberculosis, it helps to manage the symptoms like fever, bloody mucus, coughing etc. in any lung injury, Kanakasava is helpful in healing of lungs tissues. In the case of Dyspnea, this medicine is good to resolve the problems like feeling suffocated, narrowing in the chest etc. This medicine is known to be quite good in managing the bleeding disorders like nasal bleeding and fevers.

Indications
Cough
Dyspnea
Asthma
Tuberculosis
Chest injury
Dosage
2-4 ml with equal water after meals twice daily.

Contraindications
Over dose can cause stomach irritation and diarrhea.

It shouldn’t be taken without medical supervision. It may also cause side effects similar to those of Dhatura poisoning.


13. Kumaryasava – Kumari asav Benefits, Uses, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Yoga Ratnakara, Ayurvedic Formulary of India.
Introduction
Kumaryasava ( Kumari Asav or Kumaryasavam) is a poly-herbal liquid preparation, also known by other names like Kumaryasava no. 1 or Kumari Asava no. 3. This Ayurvedic medicine used in the treatment of gastritis, cough, cold, breathlessness, piles & urinary tract disorders etc.

Kumaryasava consists of 5 – 10 % of self-generated alcohol in it. The self-generated alcohol and water present in the product, act a way to distribute water and alcohol with dissolved active herbal components to the body. Kumari means Aloe Vera which is its main ingredient along with other herbs.

Kumaryasava Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Kumari Rasa (Aloe Vera) juice extract			12.288 liters
2.	Jaggery			4.8 kg
3.	Makshika (Honey)			2.4 kg
4.	Pakva Loha (Loha Bhasma) (Iron calx)			24 g
5.	Shunti (Ginger)	Zingiber officinale	Rhizome	24 g
6.	Maricha (Pepper)	Piper nigrum	Fruit	24 g
7.	Pippali (long pepper)	Piper longum	Fruit	24 g
8.	Lavanga (clove)	Syzygium aromaticum	Flower bud	24 g
9.	Twak (Cinnamon)	Cinnamomum zeylanicum	Bark	24 g
10.	Ela (Cardamom)	Elettaria cardamomum	Fruit	24 g
11.	Patra	Cinnamomum tamala	Leaf	24 g
12.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea	Stamen	24 g
13.	Vidanga (False black pepper)	Embelia ribes	Fruit	24 g
14.	Gajapippali (Long pepper)	Piper longum	Fruit	24 g
15.	Chavya	Piper chaba	Fruit	24 g
16.	Amalaki	Emblica officinalis	Fruit	24 g
17.	Hapusha	Juniperus communis	Fruit	24 g
18.	Chitraka	Plumbago zeylancia	Root	24 g
19.	Pippali moola (long pepper)	Piper longum	Root	24 g
20.	Dhanyaka (Coriander)	Coriandrum sativum	Seed	24 g
21.	Musta	Cyperus rotundus	Root	24 g
22.	Haritaki	Terminalia chebula	Fruit rind	24 g
23.	Kramuka (Betel nut)	Areca catechu		24 g
24.	Kutki	Picrorhiza kurrooa		24 g
25.	Rasna	Pluchea lanceolata	Root/leaf	24 g
26.	Devadaru	Cedrus deodara	Bark	24 g
27.	Haridra (Turmeric)	Curcuma longa	Rhizome	24 g
28.	Vibhitaki	Terminalia bellerica	Fruit rind	4.8 kg
29.	Bala	Sida cordifolia	Root	24 g
30.	Daruharidra	Berberis aristata	Stem	24 g
31.	Murva	Marsdenia tenacissima	Root	24 g
32.	Shatahva (Shatapushpa)	Anethum sowa	Fruit	24 g
33.	Lodhra	Symplocos racemosa	Stem bark	24 g
34.	Utanjana	Blepharis edulis	Seed	24 g
35.	Gokshura	Tribulus terrestris	Whole plant	24 g
36.	Yashtimadhu (Licorice)		Root	24 g
37.	Danti	Baliospermum montanum	Root	24 g
38.	Pushkaramoola	Inula racemosa	Root	24 g
39.	Atibala	Abutilon indicum	Root	24 g
40.	Kapikacchu	Mucuna pruriens	Seed	24 g
41.	Makshika Bhasma			24 g
42.	Hingupatri	Ferula nathex	Leaf	24 g
43.	Akallaka (Akarakarabha)	Anacyclus pyrethrum	Root	24 g
44.	Shweta and Rakta Punarnava	Boerhavia diffusa	Root	24 g
45.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	Flower	384 g
Methods of Preparation Kumaryasava
Extracted juice of Aloe Vera from the leaves is added with rest of the ingredients. All herbs used in this medicine are taken in coarse powder form. Then this mixture is enclosed in air tight container for further process of fermentation. After it get fermented, the contents are filtered and preserved.

Its shelf life is of 10 years. After opening the bottle once, it is better to use it within 2 months.

Properties of Kumaryasava
Kumari asav is used to manage the various health issues like liver disorders, digestive problems etc. It supports the good health of liver and maintains the healthy liver functions. Manage proper secretion of bile. Kumaryasava helps in the cleansing of liver and eliminates the toxins from liver. Hence use of this medicine is quite effective in the jaundice, spleen disorders, splenomegaly etc. To resolve the digestive complications, use of Kumaryasava is quite useful. It supports the healthy digestion and helps to manage the various problems like gas formation, loss of appetite, heart burn, nausea, flatulence, abdominal pain, bloating etc. For constipation, this medicine helps in the loosening of stools. Use of this medicine is good in piles. In the case of urinary tract disorders, Kumaryasava is known to be an effective medicine. It also helps to manage the problems associated with the urinary tract disorders like frequent urination, painful urination, inflammation of bladder, urinary incontinence etc. Kumaryasava is a beneficial Ayurvedic formulation to manage the various female health issues like anemia, menstrual complications, ovarian dysfunctions, infertility etc.

Indications – Kumaryasava Uses
Kumaryasava is used in treatment of diseases like that of liver and spleen, cough, respiratory ailments, hyperacidity, female infertility, anemia, jaundice and impaired digestion etc.
This medicine is helpful in appropriate secretion of bile.
It gives strength to the liver.
Kumaryasava is beneficial in case of (Amenorrhea) in females which has developed due to ovarian dysfunction.
Provides effective result in splenomegaly & hepatomegaly.
It is a useful remedy for Anemic & infertility in females.
Helpful in many diseases of heart.
This Asava provides positive effect in urinary diseases.
It relieves you from the condition of strained micturition
Kumaryasava can reduce swelling and provide relief from the problem of constipation.
It is a useful remedy in case of Piles and lessens the anorexia.
Good for calculus & seminal disorders.
Effectively improves the appetite.
Kumaryasava shows tonic and nourishing properties.
Increases hemoglobin in female & male.
Also effective as an Aphrodisiac.
Dosage
Take about 15 – 30 ml. once or twice a day, usually advised after food.
If there is a need it can be mixed with equal quantity of water.
Contraindications
This medicine must be taken under strict medical supervision.
It can be considered safe to use this medicine in lower dose, in children above 5 years of age.
A very high dose may result in gastric irritation symptoms.
It is best to avoid this medicine during pregnancy and lactation period.


14. Kutajarishta (Kutajarishtam) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Bhaishajya ratnavali, Atisararogadhikar
Introduction
Kutajarishta (Kutajarishtam) is Ayurvedic medicine in liquid form having 5 – 10 % of self-generated alcohol in it. This self-generated alcohol and the water in the product acts as a media to deliver water and alcohol with dissolved active herbal components to the body. It is useful in Ayurvedic treatment of diarrhea, dysentery, IBS, fever, bleeding, Crohn’s disease, and haemorrhoids. This liquid also strengthens the digestive power.

It has ability to manage vata and kapha in body.

Kutajarishta is enriched with certain properties like it is astringent, stimulant, detoxifier, anti-bacterial, anti-dysenteric and digestive etc.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Kutaja	Holarrhena antidysenterica	Stem bark	4.8 kg
2.	Dry grapes	Vitis vinifera	Fruit	2.8 kg
3.	Madhuka	Madhuca indica	Flower	480 g
4.	Gambhari	Gmelina arborea	Stem bark/root	480 g
5.	Water for Decoction			49.152 kg
6.	Jaggery			4.8 kg
7.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	flower	960 g
Methods of Preparation
Coarse powder of herbs like Kutaja, Dry grapes, Madhuka, Gambhari are made and then this powder is added with water, boiled to make decoction, which is reduced to specified quantity (21.288 liters) and then it is filtered. To it, jaggery is added and dissolved, then it is filtered and after that Dhataki is added to it. After all this it is kept closed in a clean air tight container for a period of one month for a process of fermentation.

After a month, it is taken out, filtered and preserved.

Indications
Kutajarishta is extensively used Ayurvedic treatment for conditions like diarrhea, dysentery, fever, bleeding disorders of intestine, irritable bowel syndrome, crohn’s disease, and haemorrhoids.

This Ayurvedic Kutajarishta syrup strengthens the digestive power.
It can treat loose motions and bloody dysentery.
Kutajarishta is good Ayurvedic remedy in malabsorption syndrome.
It can treat diarrhea with blood by reducing intestinal motility.
This Ayurvedic medicine is effective in dysentery and chronic diarrhea.
Kutajarishta is used in chronic fever.
Useful medicine in case of Bleeding Piles with discharge of mucus.
It has properties which makes it able to improve digestion, appetite and assimilation.
Kutajarishta is also useful in cough & anorexia.
This Ayurvedic medicine has therapeutic effects in Ulcerative Colitis.
Dosage
Use 15-25 ml once or twice a day, advised usually after food.
In case there is a need, it can be mixed with equal quantity of water.
Contraindications/Side Effects
There are no as such side effects noticed.
A very high dose of Kutajarishta may cause constipation.
It is bitter in taste which can cause nausea, vomiting and tastelessness.
Lower dose of this medicine is safe to be used in children above 5 years of age.


15. Khadirarishta – Benefits, Uses, Indications and Dosage
Introduction
Khadirarishta is a liquid poly-herbal Ayurvedic medicine which is also known by other names Khadirarishtam and Khadirarisht. Khadirarishta comprises 5 – 10 % of self-generated alcohol in it. It is clear, dark brown liquid with no frothing, essential sedimentation and has astringent taste. Khadirarishta is useful as an excellent blood purifier, antibacterial, digestive agent and eliminates blood toxins. Used in clearing Pimples and Acne from the skin.

Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali 54/365-370
Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Khadira	Acacia Catechu	Heart wood	2.4 kg
2.	Devadaru	Cedrus deodara	Heart wood	2.4 kg
3.	Bakuchi beej	Psoralea corylifolia	Seed	576 g
4.	Darvi	Berberis aristata	Roots	960 g
5.	Haritaki	Terminalia chebula	Fruit	960 g
6.	Vibhitaki	Terminalia bellerica	Fruit	960 g
7.	Amalaki (Amla)	Emblica officinalis	Fruit	960 g
8.	Makshika	Honey	 	9.6 kg
9.	Sharkara (Sugar)	Sugar candy	 	4.8 kg
10.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	Flower	960 g
11.	Kankola	Piper cubeba	Fruit	48 g
12.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea	Stamen	48 g
13.	Jatiphala	Myristica fragrans	Seed	48 g
14.	Lavanga (clove)	Syzygium aromaticum	Flower buds	48 g
15.	Ela (cardamom)	Elettaria cardamomum	Fruit	48 g
16.	Twak	Cinnamomum zeylanicum	Bark	48 g
17.	Patra	Cinnamomum tamala	Leaves	48 g
18.	Pippali	Piper longum	Fruit	192 g
Method of Preparation
All these herbs (Khadira, Devadaru, Bakuchi, Darvi, Vibhitaki, and Amalaki) are taken in coarse powder form and then boiled with the definite amount of water, which is further reduced to a quarter part to get Kashaya. This liquid is then filtered, added with sugar and thoroughly mixed. It is filtered once again.

Then rest of the ingredients are added into it and this is kept in an air tight container that has been smeared from inside with ghee for fermentation. After a month, it is taken out and filtered.

Its shelf life is of 10 years. Once the bottle is opened it is better to vacant it within 2 months.

Properties of Khadirarishta
Khadirarishta is an Ayurvedic formulation used to manage various health complications. Antimicrobial action of this medicine helps to fight against the various infections in body. Blood purification properties of this medicine are quite effective to treat the skin diseases like leucoderma, leprosy, boils, herpes & psoriasis etc. This medicine helps to manage the symptoms in skin diseases like itching, rashes & sores etc. It helps to remove the waste materials from body. Laxative action of this medicine is good for constipation as it helps in softening of stools. Anthelmintic properties of Khadirarishta are also very effective against tapeworms, roundworms and flakes. For liver disease, it helps in cleansing as it remove the toxins from liver. Hence, use of this medicine is good in jaundice, hepatomegaly & splenomegaly etc. This medicine is useful in case of tumor, abdominal lump & cysts. Respiratory properties of this medicine are good to resolve the problems like asthma, cold & cough etc. Use of this medicine is quite good to alleviate the symptoms like narrowing of air ways, bronchial congestion & shortening of breath etc. Khadirarishta is known to be an effective medicine for good digestive health.

Indications
It is a tremendous blood purifier, laxative, anthelmintic, antibacterial and digestive.
This liquid has good use in eliminating toxins from blood.
It is good for patient with heart diseases & worm infestation.
Khadirarishta is source of lowering triglyceride and improving HDL activity.
Beneficial in Skin conditions like that of leucoderma, leprosy & boils etc.
Its use has been found effective in Asthma and in cough.
Khadirarishtam is usually suggested in every kind of skin diseases, glandular enlargement, localized abdominal swelling, tumor, intestinal parasites, worm infestation, splenic enlargement, jaundice and anemia.
Also a good supplement for diabetes and obesity.
Dosage
15 – 30 ml. once or twice a day, generally advised after food mixed with equal quantity of water.

Contraindication
This medicine is safe in children above 5 years of age but only with lower dose.
During the period of pregnancy, it is better to avoid this or consume only under medical supervision.
During lactation period, it may be taken in lower doses, but that should be based on doctor’s advice only.


16. Lodhrasava (Lodhrasavam) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Introduction
Lodhrasava (Lodhrasavam) is a liquid Ayurvedic medicine used in gynecological ailments, anemia, obesity etc. Lodhrasavam encloses 5 – 10 % of self-generated alcohol in it. The self-generated alcohol and the water in the product work as a media to carry water and alcohol dissolved active herbal components to the body. Lodhrasavam is also named as Lodhrasav, Lodhrasava.

Reference: Ashtanga Hridaya, Chikitsa sthana 12/24-27, Ayurvedic Formulary of India
Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Lodhra	Symplocos racemosa	Stem Bark	12 g
2.	Murva	Marsdenia tenacissima	Root	12 g
3.	Shati	Hedychium spicatum	Rhizome	12 g
4.	Vidanga	Embelia ribes	Fruit	12 g
5.	Bharngi	Clerodendron serratum	Root	12 g
6.	Tagara (Valerian Root)	Valeriana wallichii	Rhizome	12 g
7.	Nakha	Capparis sepiaria	Fruit	12 g
8.	Kramuka (Betel nut)	Areca catechu		12 g
9.	Priyangu	Callicarpa macrophylla	Flower	12 g
10.	Musta	Cyperus rotundus	Root	12 g
11.	Kutaj	Holarrhena antidysenterica	Seeds	12 g
12.	Chitraka	Plumbago zeylanica		12 g
13.	Triphala (Haritaki, Vibhitaki, Amla)	Terminalia chebula, Terminalia bellirica, Phyllanthus emblica	Each fruit	12 g
14.	Indravaruni	Citrullus colocynthis	Fruit	12 g
15.	Chavya	Piper chaba	Root	12 g
16.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea	Stamen	12 g
17.	Kushta	Saussurea lappa	Root	12 g
18.	Ativisha	Aconitum heterophyllum	Root	12 g
19.	Ela (Cardamom)	Elettaria cardamomum		12 g
20.	Patra	Cinnamomum tamala	Leaf	12 g
21.	Twak	Cinnamomum zeylanica		12 g
22.	Bhunimba	Andrographis paniculata		12 g
23.	Patha	Cyclea peltata	Root	12 g
24.	Katuki	Picrorhiza kurroa	Root	12 g
25.	Pushkaramoola	Inula racemosa	Root	12 g
26.	Ajwain	Trachyspermum ammi	Fruit	12 g
27.	Pippali	Piper longum	Root	12 g
28.	Water for decoction		Each fruit	12.288 liters, boiled and reduced to 3.072 liters
29.	Madhu(Honey)			1.536 kg
Dosage
Take 15 – 25 ml once or twice daily, generally advised after having meal.
It can be mixed with equal quantity of water.
Method of Preparation
The first set of ingredients are added to appropriate amount of water, which is then boiled and decoction is prepared. Honey is added to it, and stored in an air tight container for fermentation for about 15 days. After this process, its contents are filtered and preserved.

Indications
Lodhrasavam is used as natural remedy for heavy periods and it has astringent properties. Lodhrasava is used in the treatment of Anemia, digestive diseases, skin diseases and intestinal worms.
Lodhrasav is a confirmed female tonic which is a useful in the treatment of almost all kinds of Gynecological diseases.
It has ability to cure Menstrual Disorders (Excessive and prolonged), reducing menstruation pain and provides strength to uterus.
This asav gives good results in obesity.
It can improve digestion.
Lodhrasav is good detoxifier which has ability to remove toxins from blood.
It provides relief in constipation.
The asava is good suggestion in case of leucorrhoea.
Helps Prolapse of uterus.
Beneficial remedy for all types of urinary diseases, diabetes, obesity and also Skin diseases.
Good to use in sprue/malabsorption syndrome.
It can be utilised in bleeding piles, diabetes & female health issues.
This asava can improve the condition of Anemia.
Contraindication
It can be a safe medicine in lower dose for use in children above 5 years of age.
During pregnancy it is should be avoided.
During lactation period, it can be used only under doctor’s advice, for a short period of time.


17. Lohasava (Lohasavam) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Introduction
Lohasava is an Ayurvedic medicine in the form of liquid containing naturally processed Iron which can pacify Kapha and Vata Dosha. Lohasava comprises of 4 – 10 % of self-generated alcohol in it. This self-generated alcohol and the water present in the product acts as a media to deliver dissolved active herbal components in water and alcohol to the body.

It is indicated in deficiency of iron in body acting as an iron tonic. Lohasava shows beneficial effects in anemic dropsy and diseases of the spleen.

Reference: Sharangdhara Samhita madhyam khand 10/34-38.
Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Shodhita Loha (Purified, herbal processed Iron)	–	–	192 g
2.	Shunti (Ginger)	Zingiber officinale	Rhizome	192 g
3.	Black pepper	Piper nigrum	Fruit	192 g
4.	Long pepper	Piper longum	Fruit	192 g
5.	Haritaki	Terminalia chebula	Fruit rind	192 g
6.	Vibhitaki	Terminalia bellerica	fruit rind	192 g
7.	Amla	Emblica officinalis	Fruit	192 g
8.	Yavani	Trachyspermum ammi	Fruit	192 g
9.	Vidanga	Embelia ribes	Fruit	192 g
10.	Mustaka	Cyperus rotundus	Rhizome	192 g
11.	Chitra (Eranda)	Ricinus communis	Root	192 g
12.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	Flower	960 g
13.	Honey	–	–	3.072 kg
14.	Jaggery	–	–	4.8 kg
15.	Water	–	–	24.576 liters.
Dosage
Take 15 – 30 ml. of medicine once or twice daily and it is usually advised after meals.

It should be mixed with equal quantity of water.

Method of Preparation
All above given herbs are prepared to a coarse powdered form. First of all jaggery is mixed with water, dissolved and filtered for waste particles. It is then added with rest of the ingredients and reserved for fermentation in a clean air tight vessel.

After fermentation get completed, the contents are filtered out and the liquid which is obtained is Lohasava.

Therapeutic Uses
Lohasava is used as Ayurvedic medicine for Anemia. Apart from anemia, lohasava is also used in the treatment of swelling, inflammation, liver and spleen conditions, itching, diabetes, gulma, ascites, piles, asthma, anorexia, cough, fistula, grahani (malabsorption) and certain digestive diseases. It increases digestion quickly and improves pallor.

Lohasava is an Ayurvedic medicine that has property to improve digestion.
This Asava is beneficial in Anemia.
It treats constipation.
Useful medicine in hepatomegaly & splenomegaly as a result of anemia and other liver and spleen disorders.
Effectively brings good results in diabetes, skin diseases, asthma & cough etc.
Also beneficial in weak Jatharagni (weak digestion), Aruchi (tastelessness) & Agnimandya (digestive impairment).
It is a suggested herbal medicine in Grahani (malabsorption syndrome) and Gulma (abdominal lump).
Lohasava is a useful remedy in piles and anal fistula.
Gives effective relief from edema (Shvayathu).
This Asava is good for heart patients.
Also benefits in conditions like chronic fever, malarial fever, jaundice and hepatitis etc.
It manages accumulation of fluid inside body.
Contraindication
Lohasava has Iron, overdose in children below 6 can lead to fatal poisoning symptoms therefore it must be taken under medical supervision and preferably after food.
High dose in adults may results in gastritis and vomiting.
It is safe to use this medicine in lower dose, in children above 5 years of age.
In pregnancy it is better to have it only under medical supervision. Avoid self-medication during pregnancy.
During lactation period it can be taken but under doctor’s advice, for a short period of time.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


18. Mustakarishta (Mustharishtam) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali,
AFI Formulations – Volume 1, Agnimandya Rogadhikara (For low digestive fire)
Introduction
Mustakarishta is a very efficient Ayurvedic medicine in the form of liquid. It is having bitter as well as sweet taste. Mustakarishta has properties to maintain the balance of Vata and Kapha dosha. It is traditionally being used in the treatment of digestive complaints like diarrhea, indigestion, etc. It is also known by other terms as Mustharishtam, Mustarishta, Mustarishtam, Mustakadyarishta.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Mustaka (Musta)	Cyperus rotundus		9.6 kg
2.	Water			49.15 liters
3.	Jaggery			14.4 kg
4.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa		768 g
5.	Yavani (Yamani)	Trachyspermum ammi		96 g
6.	Ginger	Zingiber officinale		96 g
7.	Pepper	Capsicum		96 g
8.	Clove	Syzygium aromaticum		96 g
9.	Fenugreek seeds	Trigonella foenum graceum		96 g
10.	Chitraka	Plumbago zeylanica		96 g
11.	White Caraway seeds	Carum carvi		96 g
Method of Preparation
Coarse powder of Musta is prepared and it is added to 49.15 liters of water. This mixture is then boiled and reduced to 12.288 liters and it is then filtered. This Kashayam (Herbal Decoction) is further added with Jaggery Dhataki, Yavani, Ginger, Pepper, Clove, Fenugreek seeds, Chitraka, and White Caraway seeds in a vessel.

The vessel comprising this herbal liquid mix is kept sealed for a period of one month. The sugar in Jaggery undergoes through the process of fermentation in a period of one month. After a period of a month, the contents are filtered and stored in air tight containers.

Storage: Store it in tightly closed amber colored bottle, in a cool place and protect it from light and moisture.

Properties
It is an effective Ayurvedic liquid formulation which is used for wide range of digestive disorders such as gastritis, indigestion, loss of appetite, diarrhea, IBS etc. It is very helpful to improve digestion and can be used to improve the appetite of patients who are suffering from acute and chronic diseases. This herb prevents the complications arising due to low intake of food and prevents the risk of deficiencies, also allows them to recover faster from illness. Mustakarishta acts as tonic for digestive system. It is very helpful in management of gastrointestinal disturbances. Also promotes the breakdown of food. Use of this medicine is quite beneficial in case of gastroenteritis, in which patients experience severe vomiting with diarrhea. It helps to maintain the energy level in body. Helpful in getting rid of flatulence, loose motions, indigestion, and abdominal pain. Also acts as an astringent and stops loose motions. Very effective in malabsorption syndrome by boosting the functions of digestive tract that increases the absorption of vitamins and mineral from the food. Use of this herbal supplement provides soothing and relaxing effects to the body. It also helps them to get back to the routine life to feel energetic.

Therapeutic Uses
Mustakarishta is an Ayurvedic medicine which has effective use in the treatment of digestive disorders.
Helpful in improving the digestion power and is a good for gastro-enteritis with piercing pain, anorexia.
It can provide relief from bloating, diarrhea, and gastro-enteritis.
Also useful remedy in case of Dyspepsia, malabsorption syndrome, IBS.
It provides soothing and relaxing effects to the body
Dosage
Its consumption should be 12 – 24 ml once or twice a day after food, or as instructed by Ayurvedic doctor.
In case of Children above 7 years of age it is safe to use this medicine in lower dose only.
Contraindication
Over dose of this medicine may cause gastritis, therefore it is better to use this under medical supervision only.
In pregnancy it is better to avoid or should be taken only under doctor’s prescription.
It can be taken during lactation period, because it is advised for it.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


19. Pippalyasava (Pippalyasavam) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Sharangdhara Samhita, Madhyamakhanda 10/28-33.
Pippalyasavam is a polyherbal ayurvedic medicine which is used for the treatment of digestive problems. It is a liquid fermented preparation. Long pepper (pippali) is considered as the major ingredients of Pippalyasavam. Many other herbs like Marich, Chavya, Haridra, Chitraka, Musta, Vidanga, Puga, Lodhra, Patha, Amla, Cardamom, Ushira and Tagara etc. are used in the preparation of this medicine. These herbs help to pacify the vitiated tridoshas – vata, pitta and kapha. On the other hand this medicine is also used for the treatment of piles and anemia etc.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Quantity
1.	Long pepper	Piper longum	24 g
2.	Black pepper	Piper nigrum	24 g
3.	Turmeric	Curcuma longa	24 g
4.	Chavya	Piper cubeba	24 g
5.	Chitraka	Plumbago zeylanica	24 g
6.	Lodhra	Symplocos racemosa	24 g
7.	Patha	Cyclea peltata	24 g
8.	Musta	cyperus rotundus	24 g
9.	Vidanga	Embelia ribes	24 g
10.	Puga	Betel nut	24 g
11.	Amla	Emblica officinalis	24 g
12.	Cardamom	Elettaria cardamomum	24 g
13.	Ushira	Vetiveria zizanioides	24 g
14.	Sandalwood	Santalum album	24 g
15.	Kushta	Saussurea lappa	24 g
16.	Clove	Syzygium aromaticum	24 g
17.	Tagara	Valeriana wallichii	24 g
18.	Cinnamon	Cinnamomum verum	24 g
19.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea	24 g
20.	Priyangu	Callicarpa macrophylla	24 g
Methods of preparation
Coarse powder of all the above mentioned herbs is made.
This powder is added in water, jaggery,dry grapes and Dhataki (Woodfordia fruticosa) in a container.
The container is kept closed.
The sugar in jaggery and dry grapes undergo the natural fermentation and the medicine gets prepared by about a month time.
Ingredients are filtered and stored in hygienic conditions.
Dosage
Adults: 15 – 25 ml once or two times daily, after food. Or as suggested by physician.
For kids: Use of this medicine is safe for kids in lower dose. 1 – 2 ml is suggested to the children above 2 years of age. It acts as a good appetizer in children, and also useful in intestinal worm infestation.
Pregnancy and lactation: During pregnancy use of this medicine should be avoided or can be taken under the medical supervision. During lactation period it can be taken.
Indications
Anemia
Piles
digestive complaints
Liver complaints
Tuberculosis.
Loss of muscle mass and body strength
Abdominal tumor
Gain weight
Malabsorption syndrome
IBS (Irritable bowel syndrome)
Hemorrhoids
Contradictions
Overdose of this medicine may lead to the gastric problems like gastritis. People with sensitive stomach cannot tolerate this medicine.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


20. Rohitakarishta
(Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Pleeharoga (Spleen disorders)
Rohitakarishta is a polyherbal Ayurvedic medicine which is used in the treatment of liver and spleen disorders. This medicine acts as the blood purifier. Major ingredient of this medicine is Rohitaka (Tecomella undulata). This herb is loaded with the numerous medicinal properties which is quite beneficial for the treatment of liver, blood and spleen disorders. Rohitakarishta is a fermented liquid preparation and contains 5 – 10 % of self-generated alcohol. On the other hand, this Ayurvedic medicine helps in the treatment of digestive and heart related problems.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Rohitaka	Tecomella undulata		4.8 g
2.	Pippali	Piper longum	Fruit	48 g
3.	Pippali mool	Piper Longum	Root	48 g
4.	Chavya	Piper cubeba		48 g
5.	Chitraka	Plumbago zeylanica		48 g
6.	Shunti	Zingiber officinalis		48 g
7.	Cinnamon	Cinnamomum verum		48 g
8.	Cardamom	Elettaria cardamomum		48 g
9.	Patra	Cinnamomum tamala		48 g
10.	Triphala – Haritaki, Vibhitaki and Amlaki	Triphala – Terminalia chebula, Terminalia bellerica and Emblica officinalis		48 g each
11.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa		768 g
12.	Jaggery			9.6 kg
Method of preparation
Coarse powder of Rohitaka – Tecomella undulata – (4.8 kg) is made and added to 49.152 liters of water.
Boiled the mixture and reduced to 12.288 liters.
Filtration is done and water extract of herbs (decoction) is prepared.
Thus obtained water extract of herbs (Decoction) is added to above mentioned other ingredients.
All these ingredient are taken in a clean vessel and kept closed for a period of about one month.
During this period, the sugar in the jaggery undergoes fermentation and Rohitakarishta is prepared.
Dosage
15 – 25 ml mixed with equal water once or twice daily after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.
Indications
It is used in the treatment of splenomegaly and other spleen related problems.
It is effective to treat abdominal colic.
It is used in the treatment of liver disorders, ascites, piles, sprue, and jaundice.
It is beneficial in skin diseases, anorexia and inflammatory conditions.
Useful in anemia.
Contradictions
Higher doses of this medicine may lead to gastritis problems like burning sensation in stomach.
People with sensitive stomach should not take this medicine as it may worsen gastritis symptoms.
So it is advisable to take this medicine under medical supervision.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


21. Saraswatarishta (Saraswatharishtam) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Rasayana (Brain tonic, Rejuvenator)
Saraswatarishta is an Ayurvedic nervine tonic used in the treatment of mental disorders like epilepsy, memory weakness and many other problems. Major ingredient of this medicine is Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri). This herb acts as nervine tonic and helps to pacify the Central Nervous System. Brahmi is used to improve the memory and intelligence. Moreover it helps to clear the voice & improves the digestion. It is used in the treatment of anemia, cough, diabetes, dyspepsia, anorexia and insanity. Saraswatarishta contains 5 – 10 % of self-generated alcohol in it. This self-generated alcohol and the water present in the product serves as a media to provide the water and alcohol soluble active herbal components to our body.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Brahmi	Bacopa monnieri	whole plant	960 g
2.	Vidari	Pueraria tuberosa	Tuber	240 g
3.	Shatavari	Asparagus racemosus	Root	240 g
4.	Haritaki	Terminalia chebula	Fruit rind	240 g
5.	Saunf	Foeniculum vulgare	Fruit	240 g
6.	Usheera	Vetiveria zizanioides	Root	240 g
7.	Shunti (Ginger)	Zingiber officinalis	Fruit	240 g
8.	Water for Kashaya (decoction)			12.288 liters, Boiled and reduced to – 3.072 liters
9.	Honey			480 g
10.	Sugar			1.2 kg
Prakshepa dravyas (Herbal additives for aroma and for accelerating process of fermentation)
11.	Renuka	Vitex Negundo	Seed	12 g
12.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	Flower	240 g
13.	Vacha	Acorus calamus	Rhizome	12 g
14.	Kushta	Saussurea lappa	Root	12 g
15.	Pippali	Piper longum	Fruit	12 g
16.	Trivrit	Operculina turpethum	Root	12 g
17.	Vibhitaki	Terminalia bellerica	Fruit rind	12 g
18.	Giloya	Tinospora cordifolia	Stem	12 g
19.	Clove	Syzigium aromaticum	Flower bud	12 g
20.	Ashwagandha	Withania somnifera	Root	12 g
21.	Cardamom	Elettaria cardamomum		12 g
22.	Vidanga	Embelia ribes	Fruit	12 g
23.	Cinnamon	Cinnamomum verum		12 g
24.	Gold leaf			12 g
Method of manufacturing
Coarse powder of the 1st set of herbs is made and added with water.
Saraswatarishta is boiled and reduced to a quarter part for preparing the decoction of herbs (Kashaya).
It is filtered and added with the rest of the ingredients in a golden vessel or mud vessel. Then it is added with a thin gold leaf of 12 grams.
All the ingredients are kept sealed for a month time.
After completion of fermentation (Asuta Prakriya) and confirming that the gold leaf has disintegrated in the liquid.  
Then all the ingredients are filtered and stored in a vessel smeared with ghee.
Dosage
Adults: 12 – 24 ml. once or twice daily, after food. If required, it can be mixed with equal quantity of water. It is suggested to drink a cup of milk after taking this medicine.
Kids: In lower dose it is safe to use this medicine, in children above age of 5 years old.
Pregnancy and lactation: During pregnancy, use of this medicine should be avoided. It can be taken during lactation period, under medical supervision, for a short period of time.
Indications
It enhances intelligence.
Promotes the brain sharpness.
It improves total mental ability.
Useful to treat the mental diseases.
Improves immunity.
Used in the treatment of epilepsy.
Beneficial in the problems like stammering and hoarseness of voice.
Useful to cure the digestive and bowel problems.
Effective in the sexual debility.
Improves quality of semen and sperms.
Beneficial in menstrual disorders.
Useful in infertility of both in males and females.
Contradictions
In prescribed dosage, this medicine has no side effects.



22. Ushirasava (Usheerasava)
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Raktapitta Rogadhikar (For Epistaxis and bleeding disorders)
Ushirasava (Usheerasava) is a liquid Ayurvedic medicine used in treatment of bleeding disorders (rectal bleeding, excessive bleeding after delivery, menorrhagia and nose bleeding), skin diseases, blood purification and urinary problems etc. This medicine also contains around 4 – 9 % of self-generated natural alcohol in it. This medicine is cooling in nature and is prescribed in the diseases which occur due to the excessive heat in body. Hence this medicine pacifies the excess pitta dosha in body.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Parts Used	Quantity
1.	Ushira	Vetiveria zizanioides	Root	48 g
2	Lotus	Nelumbo nucifera	Flower	48 g
3.	Hribera	Coleus vettiveroides	Root	48 g
4.	Gambhari	Gmelina arborea	Root / Stem bark	48 g
5.	Neelotpala	Nymphaea stellata	Flower	48 g
6.	Priyangu	Callicarpa macrophylla	Flower	48 g
7.	Dhanvayasa	Fagonia cretica	Whole plant	48 g
8.	Patha	Cissampelos pareira	Root  / Whole plant	48 g
9.	Kiratatikta	Swertia chirata	Whole Plant	48 g
10.	Padmaka	Prunus cerasoides	Stem	48 g
11.	Lodhra	Symplocos racemosa	Stem bark	48 g
12.	Manjishta	Rubia cordifolia	Root	48 g
13.	Shati	Hedychium spicatum	Rhizome	48 g
14.	Parpataka	Fumaria parviflora	Whole plant	48 g
15.	Pundarika – Kamala	Nelumbo nucifera	Flower	48 g
16.	Patola	Trichosanthes dioica	Leaf / Whole Plant	48 g
17.	Kanchanara	Bauhinia variegata	Stem bark	48 g
18.	Nyagrodha	Ficus benghalensis	Root / Stem bark	48 g
19.	Udumbara	Ficus religiosa	Root / Stem bark	48 g
20.	Jambu – Jamun seeds	Syzygium cumini	Stem bark	48 g
21.	Shalmali	Salmalia malabarica	Exudate	48 g
22.	Draksha	–	Raisins	960 g
23.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	Flower	768 g
24.	Sugar	–	–	4.8 g
25.	Honey	–	–	2.4 kg
26.	Water	–	–	24.576 liters
27.	Jatamamsi and Black pepper	Nardostachys jatamansi and Piper nigrum	Fine Powder	Quantity Sufficient
Method of manufacturing
A mud pot is taken. It is sterilized with the powders of Jatamansi and Black pepper.
Pure water in the given quantity is taken in the vessel.
Powders of the rest of the ingredients is added along with sugar and honey.
The ingredients are kept closed air tight for about month period so that fermentation (Asuta Prakriya) can take place.
Filtered the ingredients and preparation is preserved.
Indications
Heavy menstrual bleeding
Bleeding disorders like rectal bleeding and nasal bleeding etc.
Anemia
Early stage of liver diseases
Night fall
Spermatorrhoea
Skin diseases
Urinary tract disorders
Diabetes
Piles
Intestinal worms
Inflammation
Contradictions
A very high dose of 50 ml or more, may result in the stomach irritation.
If given for wrong complaints, it can cause delayed periods and prolong the menstrual cycles.
Dosage
Adults – 12 – 24 ml. once or twice daily, advised after food. If required, equal quantity of water can be added before consumption.
Safe for kids – In lower dosage use of this medicine is safe, in children above 5 years of age.
Pregnancy And Lactation – During pregnancy, it is advisable to avoid this medicine or take it only under medical supervision.
During lactation period, it can be taken in lower doses as per doctor’s advice.


23. Vasarishtam (Vasarishta)
Introduction
Vasarishta is a well-known herbal formulation. Its main ingredient is Vasa also known as Malabar nut. It is a strong mucolytic and anti-asthmatic. Hence Vasarishta is used to treat many respiratory disorders. It calms pitta and kapha. Vasarishtam has coagulative properties, therefore, it is also used to cure bleeding disorders like nose bleeding/epistaxis, haemoptysis. It is also called Vasakasav, Vasakasavam, Vasakadyarishtam, Vasarishta, Vasakarishtam.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Quantity
Kwatha dravya (herbs for decoction)
1.	Vasaka/Malabar nut	Adhatoda vasica	9.6kgs
Sandhana dravya (fermentative agents)
2.	Jaggery (Guda)		4.8kgs
Prakshepa dravyas (Herbal additives for aroma and for the accelerating process of fermentation)
3.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	384 g
4.	Cinnamon/Dalchini		48 g
5.	Cardamom/Chhoti elaichi		48 g
6.	Tejapatra	Cinnamomum tamala	48 g
7.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea	48 g
8.	Kankola	Piper cubeba	48 g
9.	Trikatu (Pepper, long pepper and ginger)		48 g
10.	Hribera	Pavonia odorata	48 g
11.	Water for decoction		24.576 litres
Method of Preparation
Firstly, the Kwatha dravya(decoction herbs) are washed and dried and is cut and crushed to form a coarse powder. This powder is now added to the given amount of water, boiled till it is reduced to 6.144 liters and then it is filtered to obtain kshaya (decoction). To this, decoction jaggery is added and mixed till fully dissolved. We will now add the Prakshepa dravyas (aromatic herbs) and stir to form a homogenous mixture. This decoction is transferred to a clean air tight jar which is thereafter sealed and moved to the fermentation room and constantly checked till the procedure reaches its stage of completion. After the fermentation process is completed, the decoction is filtered and stored in clean bottles away from heat, light and moisture.

Dosage
12 to 24 ml mixed in equal amount of water after meals twice a day.

Indications
Cough
Asthma
Hemoptysis
Inflammatory disorders
Bronchitis
Epistaxis
Hoarseness of voice
Other throat or lung disorders
Contraindications
There are no known contraindications or side effects of this formulation. Over dosage should strictly be avoided.


24. Punarnavasava (Punarnavasavam) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Shotha rogadhikara (Swelling in body)
This medicine is specially indicated in the deficiency of iron, ascites, dropsy and spleen disorders. It has the diuretic and liver protecting properties. Herbs like Pippali, Shunti, Maricha, Darvi, Vibhitaki, Amla, Haritaki, Vasaka etc are used in the formulation of Punarnavasava. It is a fermented product which contains 5-10% of self-generated alcohol. This self-generated alcohol and the water present in the product acts as a source to provide the water and alcohol soluble active herbal components to our body.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Pippali (Long pepper)	Piper longum	Fruit	16 g
2.	Shunti (Ginger)	Zingiber officinalis	Rhizome	16 g
3.	Maricha (Pepper)	Piper nigrum	Fruit	16 g
4.	Darvi	Berberis aristata		16 g
5.	Vibhitaki	Terminalia bellirica	Fruit rind	16 g
6.	Amla	Emblica officinalis	Fruit	16 g
7.	Haritaki	Terminalia chebula	Fruit rind	16 g
8.	Vasaka	Adhatoda vasica	Root	16 g
9.	Erandamoola (Castor root)	Ricinus communis		16 g
10.	Katuki	Picrorhiza kurroa	Root	16 g
11.	Punarnava	Boerhavia diffusa	Root	16 g
12.	Gokshura	Tribulus terrestris	Root/whole plant	16 g
13.	Kantakari	Solanum xanthocarpum	Root/whole plant	16 g
14.	Brihati	Solanum indicum	Root/whole plant	16 g
15.	Gajapippali	Scindapsus officinalis	Fruit	16 g
16.	Shushka Mulaka (Dry Radish)	Raphanus sativus	Root	16 g
17.	Duralabha	Fagonia cretica	Root	16 g
18.	Neem	Azadirachta indica	Stem bark	16 g
19.	Guduchi (Giloya)	Tinospora cordifolia	Stem	16 g
20.	Patola	Trichosanthes dioica	leaf	16 g
21.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	Flower	256 g
22.	Madhu (Honey)			800 g
23.	Draksha (Dry grapes)	Vitis vinifera	Fruit	320 g
24.	Sugar			1.6 kg
25.	Water			8.19 liters
Method of preparation
Coarse powder of all the herbs is made.
Sugar is dissolved in water and then filtered.
To this sugar solution, the rest of the ingredients are added in a clean container.
Container is sealed and kept for fermentation to a month.
Filtered and medicine is ready.
Dosage
Adults
Take 15 – 25 ml. once or twice daily, after food. If required, it can be mixed with equal quantity of water.

Kids
Use of this medicine is safe in lower dose for the children above age of 5 years.

During Pregnancy and lactation
During pregnancy this medicine should be taken only under medical supervision. Avoid the self-medication during pregnancy.
During lactation period can be taken under doctor’s advice, for a short period of time.
Indications
Edema
Swelling
Inflammatory conditions
Ascites
Splenomegaly
Gastritis
Hyperacidity
Liver disorders
Abdominal tumor
Distension
Fever
Contradictions
High dosage may result in the gastric irritation.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


25. Vajra Kshara
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali Gulma Rog Adhikara 63-69
Vajra Kshara is an alkaline ayurvedic medicine, in powdered form. This medicine is gastric stimulant, antacid, and laxative. It is used in treatment of digestive system diseases like abdominal pain, bloating and gastric problems. It balances the vata and kapha doshas in the body.

Ingredients
1 part of each of:-
Samudra Lavana – Table salt
Saindhava – Rock Salt
Kacha Lavana
Yavakshara – Kshara of Barley – Hordeum vulgare
Sauvarchala Lavana – Sochal salt
Tankana – Borax
Sarjika Kshara
Arka ksheera- Latex of Calotropis procera
Snuhiksheera – Latex of Euphorbia neriifolia.
Arkapatra – Calotropis procera
Shunti – Ginger (rhizome) – Zingiber officinalis
Maricha – Black pepper – Piper nigrum
Pippali – Long pepper – Piper longum
Haritaki – Chebulic Myrobalan (fruit rind) – Terminalia chebula
Vibhitaki – Belliric Myrobalan – Terminalia bellirica
Amalaki -Indian Gooseberry – Emblica officinalis / Phyllanthus emblica
Yavani – Hyoscyamus niger
Shweta Jeeraka – Cumin seed – Cuminum cyminum
Chitrak – Plumbago zeylanica
Method of Preparation
Ingredients are taken in fine powder from Samudra Lavana to Swarjika kshara. They are grinded under sunlight with Latex of Arka – Calotropis procera and Snuhi – Euphorbia neriifolia and Cakes are prepared. The cakes are wrapped with leaves of Arka – Calotropis procera. Kept sealed in mud bowls, and heated to red hot. It is taken out of fire and rest of the ingredients are added and mixed well to make Vajra kshara.

Dose
Take 250 mg to 1 gram in divided dose, per day, along with Trikatu churna and rock salt, after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

In Vata imbalance, associated with bloating and pain, it is given along with warm water.

In Pitta imbalance, associated with burning sensation it is given along with ghee.

In Kapha imbalance, associated with indigestion and heaviness it is given along with cow urine.

Indications
Flatulence
Abdominal distension
Constipation.
For abdominal colic pain
Bloating
Indigestion
Ascites.
Low appetite
Difficulty in urination
Liver and spleen enlargement
Side Effects
Self-medication with medicine should be avoided.
This medicine should be taken strictly under medical supervision only.
It is best to avoid this medicine in pregnant ladies and infants.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Caution
People undergoing medical treatment for low sperm count must take the precaution.
This medicine contains salts hence people with high BP should take special care.


26. Kumarkalyan Rasa
Reference – Bhaishajya-Ratnavali Balrogadhikar 1088/116-119
Introduction
Kumarkalyan rasa is a classical formulation used in the diseases of Children. This formulation is made up of herbal and mineral composition.

Ingredients
Ras-Sindoor (Formulation of Mercury)
Mukta Bhasma (Pearl Calx)
Swarna Bhasma (Gold Calx)
Abhrak Bhasma (Mica Calx)
Loha Bhasma (Iron Calx)
Swarna Makshika Bhasma (Formulation of Iron and Copper ore)
Description of Ingredients
Ras-Sindoor – This is an Ayurvedic medicine which is made from hero-mineral composition. It is used in the treatment for low immunity, providing strength to the body. In children, it increases their immunity and prevents them from various diseases.
Mukta Bhasma – This is an Ayurvedic formulation which is prepared from pearls. It is used in the treatment of cold, cough, asthma and digestive problems. It is a natural coolant ingredient, which is used in digestion and assimilation.
Swarna Bhasma – This Bhasma has been used in diseases since centuries. This is used in increasing the immunity of the individual. This ingredient is an adjuvant for various medicines and boosts their actions and also increases their efficacy. It is a good nervine tonic. It prevents children from various health issues.
Abhrak Bhasma – This compound is used in Ayurvedic formulation for its variety of uses. This is prepared from Mica after the purification process. It is used in the treatment of asthma, blood disorders, urinary disorders etc. Also it is used in the treatment of digestive problems.
Loha Bhasma – This is a mineral based Ayurvedic remedy. This formulation contains fine micro iron particles. This Bhasma is used in anemic problems. It is also used in the children who have general debility and digestive problems.
Swarna Makshika Bhasma – This is a formulation prepared from an ore of Copper and Iron pyrite. It is used in the treatment of skin, digestive problems. It provides strength to the children and also increases their immunity.
Method of Preparation
Take all the ingredients in equal quantity.
First of all properly mixes the Ras-Sindoor in a kharal yantra.
Then add rest of the bhasma in this Ras-Sindoor.
Give bhavna with the extracts of Ghritkumari (Aloe vera).
Make 65 mg tablet and let them dry.
Keep these tablets in a glass container.
Medicinal Properties
Kumarkalyan rasa is an Ayurvedic formulation and used in the treatment of numerous diseases of Children. This is the best Ayurvedic medicine for kids and children. The ingredients in this formulation have an excellent result in digestive problems, fever, low immunity, respiratory illness, jaundice etc. Normally this remedy helps in enhancing the digestion power of the kids and children.

Indications
All diseases of kids such as:
Fever
Cough
Asthma
All types of viral and bacterial disease
Indigestion
Abdominal pain
Anorexia against mother’s milk
Jaundice
Diarrhea
Weakness
Vomiting
Dosage
65 mg with honey.

Caution
It should be taken under medical supervision.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


27. Ajmoda Arka – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Arkaprakasha, Shataka 3:7
Introduction
Ajmoda arka is an ayurvedic herbal formulation. It is useful to treat vata-kapha doshas related ailments. Imbalance in vata and kapha doshas give rises to the problems related to digestive system.

Ajmoda arka is a liquid preparation which is obtained by hydro distillation of ajmoda fruits.

Ajmoda is also known with common names like ajwain and carum. It grows all over in India. The seeds of ajmoda are enriched with very advantageous properties such as antiemetic, thermo genic, carminative, stimulant, digestive, cardiac-tonic, anti-biotic, anti-spasmodic, anthelmintic, detoxifying, diuretic, anti-gout and anti-rheumatic.

This formulation has great effect on agnimandya. In Ayurveda, agnimandya term refers to impairment in digestive system. Agnimandya is a cause of various diseases such as indigestion and loss of appetite.

Ingredients of Ajmoda Arka
S. No.	Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Water for soaking and for preparation of Arka		18.0 litres
2.	Ajamoda (Trachyspermum roxburghianum)	Fruit	1.0 kg (Approximate quantity of distillate -15.0 litres)
Method of Preparation
Take the raw materials with provided appropriate quantity.
Take ajamoda fruits. Wash, dry and get powder of the fruits of ajmoda. Then pass it through 44 number sieve to retrieve boorish powder.
Transfer 100g of ajmoda powder in a round bottom standard joint flask. The flask is of 3.0 liter capacity. Add 2.0 liter water to it.
Fit the proper distillation system with distillation, receiving heads, receiving flask, double surface condenser and adequate water for condensation of distillate (arka).
Now place the flask on a heating mantle.
Adjust the temperature notations as the liquid starts to boil and continue the distillation to collect around 1.5 liter of arka.
Now keep the formulation in a tight closed container and protect it from light and moisture.
Dosage of Ajmoda Arka
Take 10 to 15 drops, two times a day or as prescribed by the doctor.
Don’t exceed the recommended dosage.
Properties
Digestive and carminative properties of this medicine help to provide the relief in the various problems like nausea, vomiting, stomach discomfort, painful digestion and bloating. It helps to improves the digestion and maintain the good appetite also. This ayurvedic medicine is very effective to manage the urinary bladder disorders. Diuretic action of ajmoda arka helps to extrude the toxins from the body. Antimicrobial action of this helps to prevent the bacterial infections in urinary tract. It also helps to provide the relief from problems associated with the urinary bladder, disorders like painful urination, frequent urination, inflammation of bladder, urinary incontinence and over active bladder etc. Use of this medicine is quite effective to treat the diseases which are due to impairment of Vata and kapha doshas. Ajmoda ark also acts as cardiac tonic. It helps to strengthen the heart muscles and maintain the proper blood flow throughout the body. Anti-inflammatory properties of this medicine help to provide relief in the body pains and also help to maintain the healthy joints.

Indications
Urinary bladder disorder such as inflammation of bladder, urinary incontinence and over active bladder etc.

Dyspepsia – impairment in digestion leads to ailments like nausea, vomiting, stomach discomfort, painful digestion and bloating.

Vata and kapha doshas impairment related disorders – these impairments can cause various ailments related to heart, joints, brain, stomach and colon.

Contraindications
It should be used under prescribed dosage.
It should not be used in pregnancy.
Persons with high pitta, should use precautions while taking ajmoda arka as it can enhance the bile and acidity in them.
Use cautiously in the cases of renal disorders.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


28. Agastya Haritaki Rasayana
Reference: Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana – 17th chapter, Kasa Chikitsa: 57-62
Introduction
Agastya Haritaki Rasayana is one of the very famous Ayurvedic medicine for respiratory problems. It is very useful in asthma. It is used in the treatment of common cold, allergic rhinitis, sinusitis, hiccups etc.

Ingredients and Method of Preparation
96gm of each of:-
Bilva – Bael – Aegle marmelos
Syonaka – Oroxylum indicum
Gambhari – Gmelina arborea
Patala – Stereospermum suaveolens
Ganikarika – Clerodendrum phlomidis
Shala-Parni – Desmodium gangeticum
Prsni-Parni – Uraria picta
Brhati – Solanum indicum
Kantakari – Solanum xanthocarpum
Goksura – Tribulus terrestris
Svayangupta
Shankha-Puspi – Convolvulus pluricaulis
Shati – Hedychium spicatum
Bala – Abution indicum
Hasti-Pippali – Long pepper fruit – Piper longum
Apamarga – Achyranthes aspera
Chitraka – Plumbago zeylanica
Bharngi – Clerodandrum serratum
Puskara Moola – Inula racemosa
3 kg 73 gm of Yava
100 fruits of Haritaki – Terminalia chebula
By adding 18.65 kg of water, these ingredients are cooked till the grains of Yava (barley) becomes soft and then the decoction is strained out.

These 100 fruits of Abhaya – Harad – Terminalia chebula are then added with the above mentioned decoction, 12gm of Jaggery.

192gm of each of:-
Ghee
Sesame oil
Powder of Pippali – Long pepper fruit – Piper longum
All the ingredients are cooked, when it becomes cool, 192 gm of honey is added. Agastya Haritaki Rasayana is formed.

Dosage
For Adults – Dosage is 1 – 2 teaspoons, once or twice in a day, before or after food, along with warm water or honey, or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

For children – Dosage is 1 teaspoon once or twice a day, with a cup of lukewarm water, before or after food, as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

If the child does not like its taste, half a teaspoon of honey can be added to this, before administration.

Indications
Cough
Asthma
Bronchitis
Common cold
Allergic rhinitis
Sinusitis
Hiccup
Tuberculosis
Loss of desire to eat
Tastelessness
Irritable bowel syndrome
Malabsorption syndrome
Phthisis
Hemorrhoids
Premature Graying of Hair
Wrinkles
Intermittent Fever
Polyuria
Frequent Urination
Debility
Side Effects
There are no known side effects with this medicine.
However, a very high dosage may result in the loose stools.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


29. Bilwadi Lehyam
Reference: Sahasrayogam – Leha prakarana – 1.
Introduction
Bilwadi Lehyam is an Ayurvedic medicine also known by other names like Bilwadi Leha, Bilwadi Lehyam, Bilvadi Leham, Vilvadi leham etc. It is used to treat the variety of stomach related complaints like vomiting, nausea, low digestion power etc.

Ingredients and How to Prepare?
Bilwa – Aegle marmelos – 1.536 kg is added with 12.288 liters of water, boiled and reduced to 3.072 liters, filtered. To this Kashayam (decoction) 768 grams of one year old jaggery is added and heated to semi solid consistency.

It is added with 12 g of each of the following:-
Musta (Cyperus rotundus), Coriander, Cumin, Caraway, Cardamom, Cinnamon, Nagakeshar (Mesua ferrea), Trikatu – Pepper, Long Pepper and Ginger.

Dosage
Take 5 – 10 g two times in a day.

This medicine is prescribed to be taken in small quantities or in repeated dosage of around 2 gms, multiple times a day.

Dosage for children below 5 years of age – 1 – 2 grams, once or twice a day, along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Dosage for children between 5 – 12 years of age – 5 grams once or twice a day along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Indications
Nausea
Vomiting
Low digestion power
Anorexia
Asthma
Contraindications
To be taken under medical supervision.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.

30. Chitraka Guda – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali
Introduction
Chitraka Guda is an ayurvedic formulation. This is formulated from the mixture of many herbs. This formulation is known to treat problems related with digestive system.

Ingredients
Guda – 4670 grams
Take following ingredients up to 470 grams:-
Bilvamool – Aegle marmelos’s root
Gambhari mool – Gmelina arborea’s root
Agnimantha mool – Clerodendrum phlomidis’s root
Sona patha mool – Oroxylum indicum’s root
Padhal mool – Stereospermum suaveolens’s root
Shalparni mool – Desmodium gangeticum’s root
Prishniparni mool – Uraria picta’s root
Kantkari mool – Solanum Xanthocarpum’s root
Brihati mool – Solanum indicum’s root
Gokshura mool – Tribulus terrestris’s root
Amla – Phyllanthus emblica
Haritaki – Terminalia chebula
Baheda – Terminalia bellirica
Arak mool – Calotropis gigantean’s root
Shatavari mool – Asparagus racemosus’s root
Danti mool – Baliospermum montanum’s root
Chitrak mool – Plumbato zeylanica’s root
Aparajita – Clitoria Ternatea
Rasna – Pluchea lanceolata
Patha – Cissampelos pareira
Sanuhikand
Kachur – Curcuma zedoaria
Take following ingredients up to 235 grams:-
Vrischikali (Indian heliotrope)
Kakoli – Roscoea procera
Sherkakoli
Yavakshara – Hordeum vulgare
Take following ingredients up to 93 grams:-
Haritaki choorna – Terminalia chebula’s powder
Shunthi choorna – Zingiber officinale’s powder
Pippali moola – Piper longum’s root
Maricha choorna – Piper nigrum’s powder
Sajji-khar
Chitraka mool choorna – Plumbago zeylanica’s root powder
Vacha choorna – Acorus Calamus’s powder
Hing fried in pure ghee
Amlavet Choorna
Method of Preparation
Take the ingredients from number 1 to 23, put in an iron container and heat.
Collect the bhasma ash when it becomes cool.
Now mix with 13 liter water and strain for 21 times.
Leave this for one day and night.
Now take out the water and boil till water left up to one fourth level.
Make the powder of ingredients from number 24 to 36.
Now in a stainless steel container, added guda and kshara water.
Boil this mixture till the sugar syrup is ready.
Now cool it down and add the powder ingredients from number 24 to 36.
Cool it down and take the mixture up to 10 grams.
Make laddu from this and store these.
Dose
5 to 10 grams with water.

Indications
Indigestion
Loss of appetite
Weak digestion
Cold and cough
Piles
Jaundice
Spleen enlargement
Leprosy
Urinary disease
Stomach diseases
Contraindications
Take the formulation under doctor’s prescription.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


31. Chyavanaprasam
Reference – Ashtanga Hridayam uttarsthan 39/ 33-39, Charaka Samhita Chikitsa 1/3/24-29
Abstract
It is a traditional form of medicine used since ancient times prepared from multiple natural herbs. Chyawanprash is a natural health supplement and immune booster which is considered as Rasayana in classics (means having rejuvenating properties). The origin of the name of this formulation is as it was firstly prepared by a rishi (saint) named ‘Chayawan’ so known as Chyavanprash. It possesses multiple health benefits like immunity booster, longevity, respiratory disorders, digestive problems and improves memory, intellect. The main aim of the great sage Chawayan rishi in this preparation was to be younger, improve vitality and strength. So in this article we will review about Chyavanaprasam basic ingredients, method of preparation, benefits and dosage.

Introduction
Chyavanprasha is a rasayana formulation which is purely herbal in nature and aims to anti ageing, antioxidant and immune booster properties. It contains amla (Emblica officinalis) as its main ingredient and it was first mentioned by Acharya Charka in classical texts. There are multiple benefits of Chyawanprash for health such as providing strength, nourishment, vitality, preventing recurrent viral infections like cold, cough, and reducing stress & anxiety. The word Chyavanprash is made of two words ‘Chyavan’ and ‘prash’, Chyavan is the name of a sage/ saint and ‘prasha’ means ‘specifically prepared food’. This formulation is prepared by processing extract from 48 numbers of drugs having jam-like consistency.

Classical Indication
According to classical texts, there are different views about Chyavanaprasam by different Acharyas but each considers it as Rasayana and balances all dosha i.e. vata, pitta and kapha. It is beneficial for everyone such as young ones, old age, emaciated, traumatised persons also. The indications mentioned in classics are as follows-

Kaas (Coughing)
Swash (breathlessness)
Jawar (fever)
Shoath (swelling)
Hridroga (heart disorders)
Vatarakta (gout)
Mutardosha (urinary disorders)
Shukardosh (seminal disorders)
Swarveda (difficulty in speaking)
Medha, samriti- Intellect, memory
Aarogya (healthy)
Dirgahayu (longevity)
Kanti vardhak (complexion)
Indriya shakti (improves sense organs)
Ingredients
The list of ingredients are given below-

Kwatha Dravya (Decoction Material)
Bilva (Aegle marmelos)
Agnimanth (Premna mucronata)
Shaynoga (Oroxylum indicum)
Patla (Stereospermum suaveolens)
Gambhari (Premna integrifolia)
Brihati (Solanum indicum)
Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum)
Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris)
Prishniparni (Uraria picta)
Shalparni (Desmodium giganteum)
Bala mula (Sida cordifolia)
Nagarmotha (Cyperus rotundus)
Pippali (Piper longum)   
Jeewak (Malaxis acuminata)
Rishbhak (Manilkara hexandra)
Kamal (Nymphaea caerulea)
Mashparni (Teramnus labialis) 
Mudgaparni (Phaseolus trilobus) 
Shringi (Pistacia integerrima)
Meda (Polygonatum cirrhifolium)
Bhumi amalaki (Phyllanthus niruri)
Jeevanti (Leptadenia reticulata)
Agaru (Aquilaria agallocha)
Chandana (Ocimum sanctum)
Draksha (Vitis vinifera)
Pushkarmool (Inula racemosa)
Shati (Hedychium Spicatum)
Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa)
Kakoli (Fritillaria roylei) 
Kshir kakoli (Lilium polyphyllum)
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)
Kaknasa (Myrtinia annua)
Amrita (Tinospora cordifolia)
Vidarikand (Pueraria tuberosa)
Vasa (Adhatoda vasica)
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis)
Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera)
Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus)
Varahikand (Dioscorea bulbifera)
Prakshep Dravya (Paste Drugs)
Madhu (honey)
Vanshlochan (Bambusa arundinacea)
Pippali (Piper longum)
Twak (Cinnamoum zeylenica)
Ela (Elettaria cardamomum)
Tejpatr (Cinnamoum tamala)
Nagkesar (Mesua ferrea)
Sneha Dravya
Cow’s ghee
Til taila (Sesame oil)
Benefits Of Ingredients
Bilva- It helps in balancing vata and kapha dosha, it is bitter in taste and corrects metabolism. It has anti-inflammatory properties and enhances digestion.
Agnimanth- It is very beneficial in vataj disorders, reduces neurological and muscular pains. It relieves severe pain and boosts digestive fire.
Shaynoga- It prevents microbes, infections, swelling and removes toxins from the body. It has an anti arthritic and analgesic effect.
Patla- It protects all nerves, muscles of the body and boosts the metabolic rate of the body. It improves heart and respiratory functioning, removes vitiated kapha dosha.
Gambhari- It strengthens cardiac muscles, reduces pain, inflammation and toxins. It is beneficial in digestion, weakness and nervous disorders.
Brihati- It is very beneficial for digestive disorders like appetite, indigestion and worm infestations. It increases appetite, strengthens heart and lungs.
Kantakari- It manages diabetes, liver damage, inflammation, asthma and brain disorders. It has antioxidant properties and aids digestion.
Gokshura- It is helpful in cough, asthma, headache or any type of pain. It manages conditions like PCOS, UTI, prostate or any inflammatory conditions.
Prishniparni- It purifies blood circulation and manages gout, piles, diarrhoea, cough, bronchitis like conditions. It protects the cardiovascular and respiratory system.
Shalparni- It is helpful in enteric fever, respiratory problems and boosts the immune system. It provides strength to muscles, bones and circulatory system.
Bala mula- It acts as a nervine tonic for vataj disorders, purifies blood, and provides foetal growth and development. It is helpful for infertility and reproductive disorders.
Nagarmotha- It aids digestion, weight loss and lactation. It fights against infections, indigestion and respiratory disorders. It acts as a good appetiser and helps in digestion.
Pippali- It reduces inflammation, pain, swelling and removes toxins from the body. It prevents stress, depression, and epileptic attacks.
Jeewak- It manages bronchitis, balances vata dosha and has rejuvenating properties. It is useful in diarrhoea, bleeding disorders and burning sensations.
Rishbhak- It is a good anti oxidant and it balances vata, pitta dosha. It has cooling action so beneficial for reproductive health and immunity.
Kamal- It stimulates blood circulation and oxygenation. It boosts digestion, corrects constipation and nutrient absorption.
Mashparni- It provides overall strength and prevents weakness. It is a rich source of potassium, calcium and magnesium.
Mudgaparni- It corrects digestive disorders like acidity, diarrhoea, burning sensation, etc. Also helpful in gout, neuropathy and worm infestations.
Shringi- It balances vata, pitta dosha and acts as mucolytic. It is beneficial in pneumonia, influenza and common cold, cough.
Meda- It increases physical strength, nourishes body tissues, nerves and acts as galactogogues. It reduces inflammation, boosts metabolism.
Bhumi amalaki- It acts as hepatoprotective, antioxidant and viral. It prevents gastric ulcers and boosts brain functioning.
Jeevanti- It manages ailments like emaciation, cough, dyspnoea, fever, burning sensation and diarrhoea. It increases memory, longevity and immunity.
Agaru- It is beneficial for skin conditions like eczema, blisters, rashes, itching and inflammatory changes. It has good healing properties and prevents microbes.
Chandana- It is very beneficial for skin, eye and blood related disorders. It is used as disinfectant to mucus membranes of genito urinary tract and respiratory systems.
Draksha- It acts as nutrient, somatic and demulcent in properties. It acts as a laxative, improves appetite,dyspepsia and improves liver functioning.
Pushkarmool- It clears respiratory pathways and has a rejuvenating property. It acts as an antiallergic and corrects asthma, bronchitis and cough.
Shati- It acts as a stimulant and health tonic to the body. It is very good for reproductive health and proves beneficial during pregnancy. It is also helpful in nausea, vertigo-like symptoms.
Punarnava- It strengthens cardiac muscles and helps in oxygenation, circulation of blood. It helps in blood purification so it is beneficial in anaemia and best for diabetic patients.
Kakoli- It is helpful in arthritis, fever, diabetes, and urinary problems. It acts as an immuno modulator and receiver from general debility.
Kshir kakoli- It is useful in inflammation, burning sensation and arthritis. It boosts immunity, heart functioning and reproductive health.
Haritaki- It protects digestion, nerves, muscles and acts as carminative. It is very helpful in cardiac and liver disorders. It detoxifies the body and relieves constipation, indigestion.
Kaknasa- It provides strength to the liver and improves bile flow in ducts. It acts as a laxative so improves indigestion, constipation and anorexia.
Amrita- It is a cardio tonic and acts as an expectorant, clears mucus from the respiratory tract. It also acts as diuretic and proves very beneficial in diabetic patients.
Vidarikand- It acts as tonic and boosts reproductive health. It helps in nervous debility, skin disorders and hepatic conditions. It also improves digestion.
Varahikand– It relieves from gas, acidity and stomach ulcers like conditions. It manages skin disorders like eczema, psoriasis and intestinal parasites. 
Vasa- It acts as an expectorant so helpful in asthma, bronchitis, pharyngitis. It prevents colds, coughs, inflammatory changes, infections.
Amalaki- It is a rich source of Vitamin C so it acts as a   good oxidant in the body and boosts the immune system. It acts as a rejuvenator and neuro tonic, hepato and cardio protective.
Ashwagandha– It acts as an aphrodisiac and provides strength to the reproductive system. It removes toxins from the body and boosts memory and intelligence power.    
Shatavari- It is a good tonic, nutrient for lactating mothers and potent galactagogue. It has antioxidant properties and boosts the immune system.
 Madhu- It is a mild laxative, anti-bacterial and has antiseptic properties. It prevents cold, cough, sore throat and mouth ulcers, improves digestion. 
Vanshlochan- It strengthens bones and heals bone fractures. It is useful in reducing inflammation, arthritis-like conditions. It has a good cooling effect and is hemostatic.
Pippali- It is beneficial in general debility disorders and provides strength. It is useful in dispepsia, flatulence and manages respiratory tract disorders.
Twak- It helps in blood circulation and is so beneficial in anaemia. It is useful in generalised body weakness, anorexia and improves digestion.
Ela- It is used in abdominal and digestive disorders like flatulence, bloating, anorexia, indigestion. It acts as a general health tonic in debility.
Tejpatr- It helps in general debility and provides strength to the metabolic system. It is helpful in loss of appetite or indigestion like conditions and also acts as a uterine stimulant.
Nagkesar- It is very beneficial for liver disorders and improves appetite. It manages piles, ulcers, bleeding disorders, inflammation and acts as disinfectant.
Cow’s ghee- It is a rich source of vitamins, helps in cellular functioning and growth. It improves memory, eyesight, immunity and muscular strength.
Til taila- It is a tonic, nutrient and helpful in respiratory disorders like cough, asthma and lung disease. It prevents inflammation, ulcers, migraine and vertigo.
Method Of Preparation
The steps for preparation of Chavyavanprash are given as following-

Firstly collect all the drugs mentioned above and wash them properly.
Then take kwath (decoction) drugs and grind it into coarse powder.
Keep the coarse powder of drugs soaked overnight in the water.
Then add 500 amalaki (Emblica officinalis) to the solution and cook it on a mild fire.
Reduce the solution till it remains one fourth in quantity to prepare decoction.
Then filter the solution obtained and remove the seeds of amalaki.
Add the prescribed amount of cow’s ghee with til taila (sesame oil) and cook on a mild fire.
Then add sweetening agent (sugar/ jaggery) in decoction and again heat it.
In the end, when it becomes like avaleha (semi solid) consistency, turn off heat and add honey into the solution obtained.
At last add all powderded (prakshepa) drugs to the solution and mix it properly and then Chyawanprash Rasayana is obtained.
Store the Rasayana in a clean airtight glass container and keep away from direct sunlight.
Properties
The properties of Chyawanprash are given below-

It boosts the immune system.
It aids the digestive system and improves digestion.
Enhances cardiovascular functioning
Improves mental and physical strength
Elongates longevity and has anti-aging properties.
Have antibacterial, microbial, anti infectious properties.
Indications
The various indications of Chyawanprash are given as following-

Fever
Common cold
Cough
Indigestion
Weak immunity
Sore throat
Burning micturition
Memory loss
Obesity
Diarrhoea
Constipation
Infertility
Hairfall
Dry skin
Contraindications
The conditions when Chyavanprash is not given are as follows-

High acidic urine
Uncontrolled diabetes
Nocturia
Chronic constipation
Loose stools
Burning sensation
Heartburn
Dosage / Usage
6-12 grams (1-2 tablespoon) once or twice a day.

Anupana
With milk or warm water.

Taste
Spicy, More sour, Less sweet.

Smell
Like Prakshep dravya (Powdered drugs)

Conclusion
As mentioned above, Chyavanprash is a natural immunity booster and can restore youthfulness by restoring damaged cells. It can be taken by all age groups in any season for the indications as discussed. It also helps in improving learning and retention properties due to the calming effect on the central nervous system. So it proves very beneficial to use as a tonic, nutritive on a daily basis.


32. Drakshavaleha
Reference: Ashtanga Hridayam Chikitsa Sthana 16/29-31
Introduction
Drakshavaleha is one of the extensively used herbal products for liver illnesses. Draksha denotes raisins and is available as herbal jam (like chyawanprash). In Ayurvedic medicines, Avaleha or Leha is a semi-solid preparation.

Ingredients
Draksha – Raisins (Dry grapes) -768 g
Kana (Pippali) (Long Pepper) – 768 g
Sharkara (sugar) – 2.4 kg
Madhuka (Yashtimadhu) (Licorice) – 96 g
Shunti (Ginger) – 96 g
Twak Ksheeri (Vamsha lochana) (Bambusa bambos) – 96 g
Dhatri rasa juice extract of Amla – 12.288 liters
Madhu (Honey) – 768 g
Method of Preparation
First of all take extract of Amla juice which is added with fine paste of raisins, powders of long pepper, licorice and sugar. Then these contents are heated till it retains semi solid consistency.

It is taken out of fire and Vamshalochana powder is added and mixed well.

After self-cooling, honey is added and mixed well and Drakshavaleha is ready.

Dosage
Consume 5–10 grams of this Ayurvedic medicine with warm water or honey.

Dosage for children below 5 years : 1-2 grams, 1-2 times a day, along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Dosage for children between 5-12 years of age : 5 grams, 1-2 times a day along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Therapeutic Uses
Good herbal therapy in Liver disorder and Anemia.
This herbal jam is ideal for those taking regular alcohol.
Protective and supportive herbal product for normal liver functions.
Useful in curing Jaundice, Chronic obstructive.
Effective in Hyper Acidity, indigestion / Dyspepsia.
Heart Burn
Contraindications / Side Effects
May not be suitable for diabetic people as it contains sugar.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


33. Haridra Khand – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali
Introduction
Haridra Khand is a very well-known and extremely effective medicine for allergy available in the form of granules. It is also known as Haridra Khandam. The prime ingredient used in it is turmeric.

Ingredients
Turmeric (Curcuma longa)
Cow ghee (Clarified butter)
Milk
Rock candy
This mixture is heated to prepare a semi solid mass. It is added with below Prakshepa dravya
Trikatu [Black pepper, Long pepper and Ginger]
Cinnamon (Cinnamomum zeylanicum), Cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum), Patra (Cinnamomum tamala) – 48 g each
Vidanga (Embelia ribes)
Trivrit (Operculina turpethum)
Triphala (Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Vibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica) and Amla (Phyllanthus emblica))
Nagakeshar (Mesua ferrea)
Musta (Cyperus rotundus)
Lauha bhasma
Method of Preparation
Take clarified butter in a pan and add turmeric powder to it. Heat it on mild flame for 2-3 minutes. Stir continuously to make a homogenous mass. While heating, once turmeric odor starts emitting, stop heating. It may get burnt due to overheating. Take pre-boiled milk and rock candy in another wide mouthed vessel. To it, add ghee fried, continue heating on mild flame and stir well. As you continue heating, the mass starts solidifying. At one stage, take out a small mass in a spatula, allow it to cool down, rub between fingers, it will yield 2 – 3 stable threads. Take a small piece of content on a spatula and put it into water, it solidifies very quickly and settles at the bottom. In the beginning stage of heating there will be no particular appreciable odor. Nearing to the end, you can appreciate typical clarified butter and turmeric odor. After observing these three symptoms, stop heating and take it out of fire. Take the prakshepa dravyas in powder form and mix them well. Add this powder mix to the ghee-turmeric-milk and sugar candy mass while continuously stirring. Slowly the whole mass gets the shape of granules.

Indications
Skin disorders which include itching
Pruritis
Blisters
Fungal skin infections
Allergic skin conditions
Hives
Dosage
1 to 2 teaspoonful with lukewarm milk or honey once or twice a day before or after meals or as prescribed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Contraindications
There are no reported side effects.
Self-medication should be avoided.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


34. Kutajavaleha
Reference: Sharangadhara Samhita
Introduction
Kutajavaleha is an herbal formulation in the form of a jam. It is very useful in curing piles, IBS etc. Kutajavaleham is another term for this formulation. It has anti-inflammatory properties.

Ingredients
Kutaj (Holarrhena antidysentrica)
Daruhaldi (Berberis aristata)
Mochras (Bombax malabacterium)
Trikatu (Pepper, Long pepper and ginger)
Triphala (Haritaki, Bibhitaki and Amalaki)
Lajjalu (Mimosa pudica)
Chitrak (Plumbago zeylanica)
Patha (Cissampelos pariera)
Bilva (Aegle marmelos)
Purified bhallatak (Semecarpus anacardium)
Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum)
Vidanga (Embelia ribes)
Hribera (Pavonia odorata)
Clarified butter
Jaggery
Method of Preparation
Prepare a concoction of Holarrhena antidysentrica and add the remaining ingredients in it and heat the mixture till you attain a semisolid consistency. Remove it from flame and let it cool down. When t is cool to the touch add honey in it.

Dosage
5 to 10 grams twice a day before meals or as prescribed by your doctor.

Indications
Piles
Ulcerative colitis
Diarrhea
IBS
Anemia
Bleeding ailments
Gastritis
Liver ailments
Contraindications
There are no reported side effects as such but it should be avoided during pregnancy.
Over dosage might cause constipation.
It should be administered with caution which lactating and in kids.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


35. Kalyanaka Guda
Reference: Ashtanga Hridaya Kalpa Sthana 2/17 – 18
Introduction
Kalyanaka Guda is a very well-known Ayurvedic medicine, which is available in herbal jam form. Kalyanaka Guda is an effective herbal medicine for piles, liver complications etc. Guda means jaggery. This Ayurvedic product is prepared with jaggery base.

Ingredients
Vidanga (Embelia ribes) – 12 g
Long pepper root – 12 g
Triphala Churna (Haritaki, Vibhitaki and Amalaki) – 12 grams each
Coriander – 12 g
Chitraka (Plumbago zeylancia) – 12 g
Pepper – 12 g
Kutaja seed (Holarrhena antidysenterica) – 12 g
White caraway – 12 g
Long pepper – 12 g
Gajapippali (Scindapsus officinalis) – 12 g
Yavani (Trachyspermum ammi) – 12 g
Sauvarchala Lavana (Sochal salt) – 12 g
Saindhava Lavana – 12 g
Vida Lavana – 12 g
Samudra lavana (table salt) – 12 g
Audbidha lavana – 12 g
Sesame oil – 384 g
Trivrit (Operculina turpethum) – 384 g
Amla (Emblica officinalis) –  fresh juice – 2.304 liter
Jaggery – 2.4 kg
Method of Preparation
Add fresh juice of Amla with jaggery and prepare thick syrup which is added to Kashaya and fine powder of the rest of the ingredients. It is heated till semisolid form is obtained.

Dosage
Consume 5-10 grams 1-2 times a day before food or after having meals or as recommended by Ayurvedic physician.

Dose for children below 5 years: 1-2 grams, 1-2 times a day, along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.
Dose for children between 5-12 years: 5 grams 1-2 times a day along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.
Therapeutic Uses
Kalyanaka Guda is very useful treatment for skin diseases.
Effective remedy in piles, ascites and fistula.
Efficient Ayurvedic Medicine in anemia, jaundice and liver diseases.
Contraindications/Side Effects
Precautions must be taken in case of people with hypertension as it contains salt.
This product must be avoided in people with diabetes.
Over dose Kalyanaka Guda may result in gastritis.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


36. Kantakari Avaleha
Reference: Sharangdhar Madhyama Khanda 8/5-9
Introduction
Kantakari Avaleha is an eminent available as herbal jam. This Ayurvedic medicine is effective for Asthma and other respiratory conditions.

Ingredients
Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum) – 4.8 kg is added to 12.288 liters of water, boiled and reduced to 3.072 liters. Filtered. This Kashayam is added with the following:-
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) – 48 g
Chavya (Piper cubeba) – 48 g
Chitraka (Plumbago zeylancia) – 48 g
Musta (Cyperus rotundus) – 48 g
Karkatashrungi (Pistacia integerrima) – 48 g
Trikatu Churna (Pepper, Long Pepper and Ginger) – 48 grams each.
Dhanvayasa (Alhagi pseudalhagi) – 48 g
Bharngi (Clerodendron serratum) – 48 g
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata) – 48 g
Shati (Hedychium spicatum) – 48 g
Sugar – 960 g
Ghee – 384 g
Sesame oil – 384 g
Method of Preparation
To 12.288 liters of water, about 4.8 kg of Kantakari is added and allowed to boil and reduce to 3.072 liters. It is then filtered. This Kashayam (Decoction) is added with Guduchi, Chavya, Chitraka, Musta, Karkatashrungi, Trikatu Churna, Dhanvayasa, Bharngi, Rasna, Shati, Sugar, Ghee and Sesame oil. The mixture is then heated till semisolid consistency is obtained.

It is then taken out of fire and the fine powder of Vamshalochana (Bambusa bambos) – 192 g and Long pepper – 192 g herbs are added.

Dosage
Consume 6-12 grams of this herbal jam along with honey / warm water / warm milk.

Dose for children below 5 years : 1-2 grams, 1-2 times a day, along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Dose for children between 5-12 years : 5 grams 1-2 times a day along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Therapeutic Uses
Kantakari Avaleha is widely used remedy for respiratory condition.
It also act as natural bronchodilator and mucolytic.
Useful treatment in curing bronchitis, COPD, cough, hiccups and cold.
Contraindications / Side Effects
It’s over dose may result in gastric complaints like burning sensation in stomach.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


37. Kushmanda Swarasa – Ingredients, Indications, Benefits and Uses
Introduction
Kushmanda is an herb which has wide and varied range of benefits as a medicine and even it is consumed as food. The winter melon is a vine grown for its very large fruit, eaten as a vegetable when it matures. The whole plant is beneficial to different systems in the body like Circulatory system, Nervous system, etc. It acts as Rasayana and Dhatu Poshaka (Promotes growth).

Name of Ingredient: Kushmanda phala
Botanical Name: Benincasa hispida
Family: Cucurbitaceae
Sanskrit Names: Kushmanda, Pushpaphala, Valliphala, Brihatphala
Categorization – According to Samhita
Acharya Charaka: Phala varga
Acharya Sushruta: Phala varga
Acharya Vagbhata: Phala varga
Chemical Composition
Thiamine (Vitamin B1), Cucurbitine, Riboflavin (Vitamin B2), Beta-sitosterol, amino acids, Pentacyclic triptenes and Bryonolic acid.

Medicinal Properties
Rasa: Madhura
Guna: Laghu, Snigdha
Veerya: Sheetha
Vipaka: Madhura
Prabhava: Medhya
Method of Preparation
Extract the juice from above mentioned ingredient by pounding followed by squeezing through a clean cloth and utilize it.

Benefits and Uses
Due to its rasa and guna it acts as Vata and Pittadosha hara, that is, it curbs the increased dosha in the body.
Due to its prabhava, it is highly beneficial in treatment related with brain and mind, thus benefitting in many mental abnormalities, Memory loss (Alzheimer’s and dementia) and also strengthens the nerves.
 It is very beneficial in many conditions related to Urinary system where it helps in easy passage of urine and other urinary tract diseases along with this it’s helpful in treatment of Renal calculi, it helps in splitting and breaking up of calculi (stones).
The medicine helps with cleansing of Urinary bladder and hence called Bastishuddikara.
It helps to relieve excess thirst by its cooling properties.
Its intake helps person gain strength and immunity.
It acts as Brumhana, thus, it helps to gain weight by providing nourishment.
It is termed beneficial in bleeding disorders due to imbalanced pitta like menorrhagia, epistaxis and rectal bleeding thus, it helps to balance the aggravated pitta.
Due to the presence of Snigdha guna it helps to balance vata dosha.
 It has a positive effect as a Vrshya, i.e, acts as an aphrodisiac by the virtue of madhura rasa, snigdha guna, sheetha veerya.
It is highly beneficial Post-Tuberculosis, as the person is weakened post Anti-Tubercular therapy; it helps person gain weight and provides nourishment alongside increasing immunity.
Additives
Kustha Churna, Madhu

Indications
Unmada (Schizophrenia), Vrshya (Aphrodisiac), Karshya (Weakness and leanness), Vatavikara, and Mutraghata (Urinary disorders).

Adverse Effects
In obese people it must be used for a limited period with minimal dosage.
It increases kapha so it should be judiciously used in winters when Flu, Asthma, Bronchitis, Cough are common.


38. Pippalyasava (Pippalyasavam) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Sharangdhara Samhita, Madhyamakhanda 10/28-33.
Pippalyasavam is a polyherbal ayurvedic medicine which is used for the treatment of digestive problems. It is a liquid fermented preparation. Long pepper (pippali) is considered as the major ingredients of Pippalyasavam. Many other herbs like Marich, Chavya, Haridra, Chitraka, Musta, Vidanga, Puga, Lodhra, Patha, Amla, Cardamom, Ushira and Tagara etc. are used in the preparation of this medicine. These herbs help to pacify the vitiated tridoshas – vata, pitta and kapha. On the other hand this medicine is also used for the treatment of piles and anemia etc.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Quantity
1.	Long pepper	Piper longum	24 g
2.	Black pepper	Piper nigrum	24 g
3.	Turmeric	Curcuma longa	24 g
4.	Chavya	Piper cubeba	24 g
5.	Chitraka	Plumbago zeylanica	24 g
6.	Lodhra	Symplocos racemosa	24 g
7.	Patha	Cyclea peltata	24 g
8.	Musta	cyperus rotundus	24 g
9.	Vidanga	Embelia ribes	24 g
10.	Puga	Betel nut	24 g
11.	Amla	Emblica officinalis	24 g
12.	Cardamom	Elettaria cardamomum	24 g
13.	Ushira	Vetiveria zizanioides	24 g
14.	Sandalwood	Santalum album	24 g
15.	Kushta	Saussurea lappa	24 g
16.	Clove	Syzygium aromaticum	24 g
17.	Tagara	Valeriana wallichii	24 g
18.	Cinnamon	Cinnamomum verum	24 g
19.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea	24 g
20.	Priyangu	Callicarpa macrophylla	24 g
Methods of preparation
Coarse powder of all the above mentioned herbs is made.
This powder is added in water, jaggery,dry grapes and Dhataki (Woodfordia fruticosa) in a container.
The container is kept closed.
The sugar in jaggery and dry grapes undergo the natural fermentation and the medicine gets prepared by about a month time.
Ingredients are filtered and stored in hygienic conditions.
Dosage
Adults: 15 – 25 ml once or two times daily, after food. Or as suggested by physician.
For kids: Use of this medicine is safe for kids in lower dose. 1 – 2 ml is suggested to the children above 2 years of age. It acts as a good appetizer in children, and also useful in intestinal worm infestation.
Pregnancy and lactation: During pregnancy use of this medicine should be avoided or can be taken under the medical supervision. During lactation period it can be taken.
Indications
Anemia
Piles
digestive complaints
Liver complaints
Tuberculosis.
Loss of muscle mass and body strength
Abdominal tumor
Gain weight
Malabsorption syndrome
IBS (Irritable bowel syndrome)
Hemorrhoids
Contradictions
Overdose of this medicine may lead to the gastric problems like gastritis. People with sensitive stomach cannot tolerate this medicine.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


39. Saubhagya Vati
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Jwara Rogadhikara 182 – 183 AFI. Vol. 1.
Introduction
Saubhagya Vati is an effective Ayurvedic preparation, available in the tablet form. It is used in Ayurvedic treatment of fever, cough and gastric conditions. This Ayurvedic medicine contains heavy metal ingredients and hence it should be taken only under strict medical supervision.

Ingredients
10 g fine powder of each of:-
Saubhagya -Shuddha Tankana – Purified Borax
Amruta – Vatsanabha – Aconitum ferox
Jiraka – Cumin – Cuminum cyminum
Sauvarchala Lavana – Sochal salt
Saindhava Lavana – Rock salt
Vida Lavana – Vida salt
Samudra Lavana – Common salt
Audbhida Lavana
Shunti – Ginger Rhizome – Zingiber officinalis
Maricha – Black pepper – Piper nigrum
Pippali – Long pepper fruit – Piper longum
Harad – Chebulic Myrobalan fruit rind – Terminalia chebula
Bahera– Belliric Myrobalan fruit rind – Terminalia bellirica
Amalaki – Indian gooseberry fruit – Emblica officinali
Abhraka Bhasma – Purified and processed Mica
Shuddha Gandhaka – Purified Sulphur
Rasa – Purified Mercury
Juice extract of Nirgundi – Vitex negundo
Juice extract of Bhringaraja – Eclipta alba
Juice extract of Vasa – Malabar nut tree (root / whole plant) – Adhatoda vasica
Juice extract of leaves of Apamarga – Achyarnthes aspera
Method of Preparation
The fine powder of solid ingredients are triturated with juice extracts of herbs, a paste is made. Pills are prepared, dried and preserved.

Indications
Fever
Chronic
Intermittent fever
Cough
Cold
Bronchitis
Asthma
Anorexia
Depression
Colicky pain
Nausea
Excessive thirst
Dosage
250 mg 1 – 2 times a day, before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor. It is traditionally administered along with ginger juice or warm water.

Side Effects
Take this medicine only under medical supervision.
This medicine should be avoided by pregnant, lactating mothers and children.
Over dosage with this medicine may result in the slight burning sensation in stomach or poisonous effects.
People with high BP should take this medicine with special care as it contains salt as an ingredient.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.

40. Vasavaleha – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali
Introduction
Vasavaleha is a well-known herbal formulation in the form of a jam or paste. It is primarily used in treating respiratory disorders.

Ingredients
Vasa (Adhatoda vasica)
Long pepper (Piper longum)
Clarified butter
Honey
Sugar
Method of Preparation
Both the ingredients (vasa and sugar) are heated till they reach a semi solid consistency. During heating add a specified amount of clarified butter. After sometime add powdered long pepper and mix well. Add honey in the end and combine to form a homogenous mixture.

Properties
Vasavaleha is an ayurvedic formulation that is very effective in managing broad range of ailments. This formulation known to contain herbs like vasa and pippali. Vasa is a very fruitful herb which is loaded with therapeutically properties like bronchodilator, Anti-asthmatic, expectorant, Anti-ulcerative, Anti-allergy, Anti-tubercular and antimicrobial etc. these properties are provided via phytochemicals present in the herb – alkaloids, maiontone, vasicinolone and vasicinol etc. the other herb long pepper is known to consist alkaloids, liganins, saponins, carbohydrates, piperine, piplatin and long chain hydrocarbons etc. which enrich herb with medicinal properties like anti-asthmatic, bio-availability, immunomodulatory, Hepatoprotective and antibacterial etc. These herbs combine to formulate a fruitful formulation that is known to cure certain problems such as properties like bronchodilator known to manage problem of bronchitis, expectorant properties known to clear the air passages and provide relief from cold and cough, anti-asthmatic and anti-allergic manage asthma problem, anti-tubercular properties control the TB condition, immunomodulatory known to enhance immunity in the body, antimicrobial activities control the microbial infections and anti-ulcerative control the formation of ulcers in the body.

Indications
Cold
Cough
Bronchitis
Tuberculosis
Asthma
Pain in the abdominal flanks
Cardiac pain
Epistaxis
Ulcerative colitis
Menorrhagia
Cardiac discomfort
Dosage
6 to 12 grams twice a day after meals with warm milk, water or honey or as prescribed by your doctor.

Contraindications
There are no reported side effects of this formulation.
Over dosage might cause stomach discomfort.
Diabetic patients should take under strict medical supervision.


41. Vyaghri Haritaki Avaleha
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali Kasa Rogadhikara 43 – 46
Vyaghri Haritaki Avaleha is an Ayurvedic medicine available in herbal jam form. It is mainly used in the treatment of cough, cold, asthma, bronchitis, tuberculosis etc. It balances Vata and Pitta in the body.

Ingredients
Kantakari – Yellow berried nightshade (whole plant) – Solanum xanthcarpum – 4.8 kg
Water for decoction – 12.288 liters, boiled and reduced to 3.072 liters, filtered.

Haritaki – Chebulic Myrobalan fruit rind – Terminalia chebula – 1.2 kg
Guda – Jaggery – Saccharum officinarum
Shunti – Ginger Rhizome – Zingiber officinalis – 96 g
Maricha – Black pepper – Piper nigrum – 96 g
Pippali – Long pepper fruit – Piper longum – 96 g
Twak – Cinnamon – Cinnamomum zeylanicum – 48 g
Patra – Cinnamomum tamala – 48 g
Ela – Cardamom – Elettaria cardamomum – 48 g
Nagakeshara – Mesua ferrea – 48 g
Madhu – 288 g
Method of Preparation
Haritaki free from seed is taken in powder form and is steamed in purification device (Dola Yantra). It is added with kantakari decoction and jaggery, heated to semisolid consistency. On cooling, rest of the ingredients are added and mixed well.

Properties
It is an Ayurvedic medicine which is available in the form of herbal jam. It is very effective for the management of respiratory problems such as cough, cold, asthma, bronchitis, tuberculosis etc. The herbs used in the preparation of this jam have ability to balance vata, and pitta doshas and problems related to them. It helps in the management of all three types of cough (vataj, pittaj and kaphaj). It also has antibacterial action and is useful in many respiratory ailments like Chronic Bronchitis, Asthma, Cough, and Tuberculosis. It has proven to be very effective in throat related problems like Aphasia, Hoarseness of voice, and Loss of voice. Use of this medicine is also very useful in constipation. It helps to improve the digestion and aids in enhancing appetite also.

Indications
Cough
Asthma
Bronchitis
Cold
Rhinitis
Hoarseness of voice
Loss of voice
Dosage
Take 5 – 10 g once or twice a day before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.
Dosage for children below 5 years of age : 1 – 2 grams, once or twice a day, along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.
Dosage for children between 5 – 12 years of age : – 5 grams once or twice a day along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.
Side Effects
Over-dosage with this medicine may result in the gastritis.
Take this medicine in precise dose and for limited period of time, as advised by doctor.
For diabetic patients this medicine should be taken only under medical supervision.
Pregnant ladies, lactating mothers and children should take this medicine strictly under medical supervision.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Store in a dry cool place.


42. Dashamula Panchakoladi Kashayam
Reference – Sahasrayoga Kashayaprakarana.
Introduction
Dashamula Panchakoladi Kashayam is an ayurvedic formulation that is known to contain mixture of effective herbs. This is known to contain dashmoola – refers to ten roots, Panchakola – known to contain five herbs and some other herbs.

Ingredients
Dashamoola – known to contain following ten herb roots:-
Gambhari – Gmelina arborea
Shyonaka – Oroxylum indicum
Shalaparni – Desmodium gangeticum
Brihati – Solanum indicum
Kantakari – Solanum xanthocarpum
Gokshura – Tribulus terrestris
Prishnaparni – Uraria picta
Bilva – Aegle marmelos
Agnimantha – Premna mucronata
Patala – Stereospermum suaveolens
Panchakola – known to contain following herbs:
Nagara – Zingiber officinalis
Pippali – Piper longum
Chitraka – Plumbago zeylanica
Chavya – Piper chaba
Pippalimoola – Long pepper root
Triphala – known to contain following three herbs:
Vibhitaki – Terminalia bellirica
Haritaki – Terminalia chebula
Amla – Emblica officinalis
Trivrit – Operculina turpethum
Danti – Baliospermum montanum
Method of Preparation
Take all the herbs and put in a pot or container.
Now add the water in the container and boil the water.
Boil the water till it is reduced up to its one-fourth level.
Filter after the boiling process and decoction is prepared.
Dose
12 to 24 ml, before food, two times a day, with equal amount of water.

Indications
Ascites
Dropsy
Purgation
Contraindications
Over dose can cause diarrhea and gastritis problem.
Avoid in dehydrated conditions.
Take under medical prescription.


43. Dashmularishta – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Sharangadhara Samhita, Madhyamakhanda
Introduction
Dashmularishta is clear dark brown liquid which does not lather and settle with pleasant aroma and bitter taste. It has ten roots along with other herbs, hence the name is “Dashmularishta”. This Ayurvedic liquid provides strength, enhances the immune system, help to bring an instant activity and vigor in your daily chores. It is used in indigestion, lack of taste, respiratory disorders, fistula, vomiting, anemia, liver diseases, skin diseases, piles, UTI & jaundice etc. Dashmularishta is used as a general health tonic. The liquid is also used for females who can’t conceive.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
Kwatha dravya (Herbs for decoction)
1.	Bilva	Aegle marmelos		240 g
2.	Shyonaka	Oroxylum indicum		240 g
3.	Gambhari	Gmelina arborea		240 g
4.	Patala	Stereospermum chelonoides		240 g
5.	Agnimantha	Clerodendrum phlomidis		240 g
6.	Shalaparni	Desmodium gangeticum		240 g
7.	Prishnparni	Uraria picta		240 g
8.	Brihati	Solanum indicum		240 g
9.	Kantakari	Solanum surattense		240 g
10.	Gokshura	Tribulus terrestris		240 g
11.	Chitraka	Plumbago zeylanica		1.200 g
12.	Pushkaramoola	Inula racemosa		1.200 g
13.	Lodhra	Symplocos racemosa		960 g
14.	Guduci	Tinospora cordifolia		960 g
15.	Amalaki	Emblica officinalis		768 g
16.	Duralabha	Fagonia cretica		576 g
17.	Khadira	Acacia catechu		384 g
18.	Kapittha	Feronia limonia		96 g
19.	Bibhitaka	Terminalia bellirica		96 g
20.	Punarnava	Boerhaavia diffusa		96 g
21.	Chavya	Piper retrofractum		96 g
22.	vijayasara	Pterocarpus marsupium		384 g
23.	Haritaki	Terminalia chebula		384 g
24.	Kushta	Saussurea costus		96 g
25.	Manjishtha	Rubia cordifolia		96 g
26.	Devadaru	Cedrus deodara		96 g
27.	Vidanga	Embelia ribes		96 g
28.	Yashtimadhu	Glycyrrhiza glabra		96 g
29.	Bharngi	Clerodendrum serratum		96 g
30.	Jatamansi	Nardostachys jatamansi		96 g
31.	Priyangu	Callicarpa macrophylla		96 g
32.	Sariva	Hemidesmus indicus		96 g
33.	Krishna jiraka	Carum carvi		240 g
34.	Trivrit	Operculina turpethum		96 g
35.	Renuka	Vitex negundo		96 g
36.	Rasna	Pluchea lanceolata		96 g
37.	Pippali	Piper longum		96 g
38.	Kramuka	Areca catechu		96 g
39.	Shathi	Hedychium spicatum		96 g
40.	Haridra	Curcuma longa		96 g
41.	Mahameda	Asparagus racemosus		96 g
42.	Kakoli	Roscaea procera		96 g
43.	Kshirakakoli	Lilium polyphyllum	Root	96 g
44.	Riddhi	Habenaria intermedia		96 g
45.	Vriddhi	Habenaria edgeworthii		96 g
46.	Shatapushpa	Anethum graveolens		96 g
47.	Padmaka	Prunus cerasoides		384 g
48.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea		96 g
49.	Musta	Cyperus rotundus		96 g
50.	Kutaja	Holarrhena antidysenterica		96 g
51.	Shringi	Pistacia integerrima		96 g
52.	Jivaka	Pueraria tuberosa		96 g
53.	Rishabhaka	Microstylis wallichii		96 g
54.	Sathi	Valeriana officinalis		96 g
55.	Meda	Polygonatum verticillatum		96 g
56.	Water for decoction		100.608 litres, Reduced to – 25.152 litres
57.	Draksha	Vitis vinifera		3.072 kg
58.	Madhu			1.536 kg
Sandhana dravya (fermentative agents)
59.	Guda (Jaggery)			19.200 kg
Prakshepa dravyas (Herbal additives for aroma and for accelerating process of fermentation)
60.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa		1.440 g
61.	Kankola	Piper cubeba		96 g
62.	Jala	Coleus vettiveroides		96 g
63.	Chandana	Santalum album		96 g
64.	Jatiphala	Myristica fragrans		96 g
65.	Lavanga	Syzygium aromaticum		96 g
66.	Tvak	Cinnamomum verum		96 g
67.	Ela	Elettaria cardamomum		96 g
68.	Tejapatra	Cinnamomum tamala		96 g
69.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea		96 g
70.	Pippali	Piper longum		96 g
71.	Kasturi	Moschus moschiferus		3 g
72.	Kataka	Strychnos potatorum		Q.S for cleaning
Method of Preparation
Firstly the first 54 drugs are to be washed, dried and powdered. After that add them in the given amount of water and soak overnight. Put them over heat and reduce the amount to half. Now, wash and crush the kwatha herb of the formulation. Add the given amount of water, soak it overnight, boil the mixture, reduces it to ¼ and strain to obtain kwatha.

Collect the kwatha in a single container and stir till they are fully incorporated. Grind the Prakshepa dravyas in a fine powder, add the remaining ingredient into the formulation and let it dissolve completely. Transfer the filtered product in a clean container, add dhataki, madhu and prakshepa dravyas. Seal the container, put it away for fermentation and keep checking after short span of time till its fully fermented.

Dosage
15-25ml with equal quantity of water after meals twice daily.

Properties
Dashmularishta possess various medicinal properties like anti-oxidant, analgesic, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory along with rejuvenator, revitalizer and restorative activities that bring benefits in many diseases. It is quiet helpful in imparting strength & reducing weakness. Dashmularishta is an Ayurvedic tonic for female health that helps in recovery of post-delivery weakness. It prevents postpartum problems after delivery like infectious diseases of uterus, bladder and kidneys, backache, fatigue, excess discharge, sluggish uterus, swollen breasts and improves milk production in new mother. This Ayurvedic liquid is even helpful in managing postpartum depression and recovers the mental state of the women. It also refines complexion and enhances the glow of the skin post-delivery period. Dashmularishta is even beneficial in male to improve fertility and suitable in case of semen deficiency. Suitable to reduce pain occurring during menstruation. It can eradicates toxin away from the body and supply nourishment to the body. This liquid can manage inflammatory condition of joints. Beneficial effects in other condition like piles, jaundice, anemia and urinary problems like excessive flow of urine or its retention. It is also suitable natural remedy for neurological diseases and good enough to provide strength to muscles, bones, ligaments and improves immunity.

Indications
Dysmenorrhea
Anorexia
Vomiting
Cough
Backache
Breathlessness
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Jaundice
Rheumatoid arthritis
Indigestion
Loss of appetite
Sciatica
Neuralgia
Postpartum weakness
Anemia
Swollen breast
Dysuria
Infertility
Malnutrition
General weakness
Lack of sperm count
Contraindications
Heart burn
Diarrhea with burning sensation in anus
Excessive thirst
Mouth ulcers
It shouldn’t be taken in severe burning sensation as it can worsen the problem, if it is still required to be taken then it should be taken with licorice [mulethi] or other herbs that have a cooling effect on the digestive system like coriander & cumin etc.

It should be avoided during pregnancy but it is safe in lactating mothers as it promotes breast milk supply.



44. Guduchyadi Loha
Reference – Bhaishajya-Ratnavali Vataraktadhikar 579/71
Introduction
Guduchyadi loha is a potent Ayurvedic formulation. It is useful in the treatment of Vatarakta (Gout).

Ingredients
Loha Bhasma (Iron Calx) – 500 gm
Guduchi Satva (Tinospora cordifolia) – 50 gm
Amla Churna (Powder of Emblica officinalis) – 50 gm
Haritaki Churna (Powder of Terminalia chebula) – 50 gm
Bibhitaki Churna (Powder of Terminalia bellerica) – 50 gm
Shunthi Churna (Powder of Zingiber officinale) – 50 gm
Pippali Churna (Powder of Piper longum) – 50 gm
Maricha Churna (Powder of Piper nigrum) – 50 gm
Vaividang Churna (Powder of Embelia ribes) – 50 gm
Nagarmotha Churna (Powder of Cyperus rotundus) – 50 gm
Chitrakmool Churna (Powder of Plumbago zeylanica) – 50 gm
Description of Ingredients
Loha Bhasma – This is the Iron calx formulation. It is used in Ayurveda for the treatment of Anemia, Indigestion, and Diarrhea etc. This ingredient is also beneficial in treating high uric acid in the blood.
Guduchi Satva – This ingredient has immense health benefits. It is helpful in pacifying pitta dosha and hence useful in diseases like indigestion, constipation, fever, Gout, Fatigue, liver problems etc.
Amla Churna – This powder is very beneficial against most of the diseases. It is effective against indigestion, hyperacidity, boosting immunity etc. It is also helpful in clearing away the uric acid crystals from the body.
Haritaki Churna – This is also called the mother of herbs as it pacifies all the three doshas in the body. Some of the benefits are that it improves digestion, supports healthy liver, constipation etc.
Bibhitaki Churna – This is used in Ayurveda to treat various diseases such as fever, respiratory disorders, constipation. It is also helpful in inflammatory conditions.
Shunthi Churna – It is used to improve the metabolism of the body. It is a good appetizer. It is very helpful in decreased appetite. It is also beneficial in throat infections and cold.
Pippali Churna – It plays a great role in many diseases. It is helpful in digestive problems, respiratory problems, metabolic disorders etc.
Maricha Churna – It improves the digestive tract and helps in digestion and alleviates the symptoms such as indigestion, flatulence, bloating, constipation etc. It pacifies vata dosha which is the cause of vatarakta.
Vaividang Churna – It is a powerful anti-parasitic herb in Ayurveda. It is widely used in improving the digestion (Worm infestation). It pacifies Vata dosha. It is also used in the treatment of bloating, distension, anorexia, pain, inflammation etc.
Nagarmotha Churna – It is a potent diuretic, analgesic, anti-inflammatory, anti-rheumatic etc. So Nagarmotha is very useful in treating Gout conditions.
Chitrakmool Churna – It is widely used in the treatment of digestive ailments. It promotes good digestion, stimulates appetite and is helpful in indigestion, loss of appetite, anorexia, cough etc.
Method Of Preparation
Take all the above mentioned ingredients in a kharal yantra or Ajnars machine and properly mixes this mixture.
Give water bhavna for 2-3 days.
Make 375 mg tablet and dry them under the shadow.
Keep this formulation in a glass container.
Medicinal Properties
Guduchyadi loha is a classical formulation used for centuries. It is used in the treatment of Vatarakta (Gout). The ingredients are also helpful in managing digestive power by stimulating digestive fire. This formulation pacifies vata dosha. Guduchi is the best herb for treating gouty arthritic conditions. It is also helpful in enhancing immunity. This Ayurvedic remedy has anti-inflammatory properties and hence useful in Gout.

Indications
Vatarakta (Gout)
Indigestion
Flatulence
Acidity
Loss of appetite
Anorexia
Respiratory ailments
Low immunity
Dosage
1 tablet twice a day with honey or Guduchi swaras (Extracts of Tinospora cordifolia).

Caution
It should be taken under medical advice.


45. Pathyadi Churna
Reference: Astangahradayam uttaratantra 22/102, Ayurvedic Formulary of India
Introduction
Pathyadi Churna is an ayurvedic herbal powder that balances the vata and Kapha doshas. It is useful for both external application and oral use. It is very useful in in the treatment of anemia, constipation, skin diseases etc.

Ingredients
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)1 Part
Gomutra – Cow urine – 4 Parts
Hrivera (Pavonia odorata) – 1 Part
Mishreya (Anethum sowa) – 1 Part
Kushta Saussurea lappa
Method of Preparation
Fruit wall (pericarp) of Haritaki is boiled in gomutra which is then separately soaked in each decoction of Hrivera, Mishreya and Kushta and allowed to get dry under sunlight. When Haritaki completely gets dry, it is made in to powder form. Store in a cool and dry place.

Dosage
Consume ½ to 1 teaspoon Powder along with water, 2 times daily after having meals or as directed by Ayurvedic Doctor.

Therapeutic Uses
Excellent use in whole body swelling, anemia and ascites.
Also effective in skin disorders like in psoriasis, dermatitis, eczema, leucoderma etc.
Also acts as a laxative.
Contraindications/ Side Effects
Better to avoid in pregnancy.
Low doses to be administered during lactation and in children.
Not suggested in people suffering from diarrhea.
Keep it out of reach and sight of children.


46. Manasamitra Vatakam – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Sahasrayogam Gutika Prakarana 68.
Introduction
Manasamitra Vatika is an ayurvedic formulation that is prepared from very effective herbs. This herbal formulation is very efficient to treat the mental illness and disorders.

Ingredients
Bala (Sida cordifolia)
Nagbala (Grewia hirsuta)
Bilwa (Aegle marmelos)
Prisniparni (Uraria picta)
Pravala
Sankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis)
Kukundara (Blumea lacera)
Swarna
Pushkarmoola (Inula racemosa)
Mrigasringa
Vacha (Acorus calamus)
Swarnamakshika
Shweta chandan (Santalum album)
Rakta chandan (Pterocarpus santalinus)
Mouktika (Mukta pishti)
Loha bhasma
Madhuka twak (Madhuca indica)
Pippali (Piper longum)
Karpura (Cinnamomum camphora)
Elavaluka (Elettaria cardamomum)
Indrayana vishesha (Citrullus colocynthis)
Ratanjyoti (Alkanna tinctoria)
Nirgundi (Vitex negundo)
Mustha (Cyprus rotundus)
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata)
Rajata (Rajat bhasma)
Shilajatu (Asphaltum)
Gojihwa (Onosma bracteatum)
Padmakesara (Nelumbo nucifera)
Jivaka (Malaxis acuminata)
Rishabhaka (Microstylis muscifera)
Kakoli (Roscoea procera)
Brihati (Solanum indicum)
Gorakhmundi (Sphaeranthus indicus)
Bhunimba (Andrographis paniculata)
Aragwadha (Cassia fistula)
Parushaka (Grewia asiatica)
Phalatraya (Gentiana kurroo juice)
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia)
Gopika Dwandwa (2 types of sariba) (Hemidesmus indicus), (Cryptolepis buchanani)
Jivanthi (Leptadenia reticulata)
Somavalli (Ephedra gerardiana)
Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera)
Haridra (Curcuma longa)
Usira (Vetiveria zizanioides)
Draksha (Vitis vinifera)
Yashtyahwa (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Riddhi (Habenaria edgeworthii)
Vriddhi (Habenaria intermedia)
Durva (Cynodon dactylon)
Hamsapadi (Adiantum philippense)
Katphala (Myrica esculenta)
Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticum)
Tulasi dala (Ocimum sanctum)
Kasturi (Deer musk)
Keasara (Crocus sativus)
Method of Preparation
Take all the ingredients up to 10 grams.
Powder all the ingredients individually and mix all together later.
Triturate this powder mixture with the liquids (the juice and water decoction) and make its paste.
Make the pills from this paste.
Medicinal Properties
Manasamitra Vatakam is an effective Ayurvedic formulation that helps to keep the Vata, Pitta and Kapha dosha balanced, potent in Neuro Protective, Anti-Stress, Anxiolytic, Anti-Depressant Anti-Inflammatory and Antioxidant etc properties.

It is very useful Ayurvedic medicine for psychiatric conditions, improves blood circulation and oxygen supply to brain cells thereby helps to expand intelligence, improve brain functions, enhance memory and concentration as well as boost retention power. It is helpful in depression too, promotes calmness and feeling of peace in the mind. This herbal preparation is even useful to decreases anxiety and prevent repeated occurrences of anxiety disorders. It lessens the feeling of restlessness, tiredness, and nervousness. Manasamitra Vatika is beneficial in epilepsy, seizures and mania, reducing their frequency of occurrence. It is beneficial in insomnia too, helps to induce sleep, calms the mind, improves the quality of sleep and lessens the sleep disturbances.

It is even useful in Alzheimer’s disease and Schizophrenia. This Vatika is suitable in improving speech problems. It is even useful in children for diseases like autism and also helpful in poisonous condition.

Indications
Mental illness
To enhance memory
Depression
Psychosis
GAD (generalized anxiety disorder)
Epilepsy
Seizures
Stress buster
Improves concentration
Pre-menstrual tension
Insomnia
Migraine
Alzheimer’s disease
Dose
Two tablets two times a day, before or after meals.

Contraindications
Always take under supervision of medical practitioner.
Over dose can cause burning sensations.


47. RASNASAPTHAKAM KASHAYAM – INGREDIENTS, USES, BENEFITS AND DOSAGE
INTRODUCTION
Rasnasapthkam kashayam formulation is prepared from various herbs where the prime ingredient is rasna. It comes under kashayam preparation and made of seven herbs. This herbal formulation is useful in musculoskeletal disorders to treat joint stiffness, pain, and swelling.

INGREDIENTS
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata) – 1 part
Amrutha (Tinospora cordifolia) – 1 part
Daru (Cedrus deodara) – 1 part
Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) – 1 part
Gokshur (Tribulus terrestris) – 1 part
Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) – 1 part
Errand (Ricinus communis) – 1 part
Additive is shunthi churna (Zingiber officinale)
Water – 16 times to all
BENEFITS OF INGREDIENTS
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata) – Rasna is a medicinal plant which is digestive in action that helps to digest ama (toxins)from the body and also averts the chance of accumulation of toxins in the body. It treats Vata and Kapha dosha in the body and useful in treating rheumatoid arthritis as it prevents accumulations of toxins in joints which is the main cause of rheumatoid arthritis. It relieves symptoms like inflammation and pain. It has muscle relaxant properties and widely used to manage stiffness.
Amrutha (Tinospora cordifolia) – It is pungent and bitter in taste and pacifies all three doshas in the body. Its main action is anti-inflammatory and it helps in the treatment of rheumatism. It also exhibits analgesic quality helpful in the treatment of pain in sides of flanks, ankles and pelvis. It is immunomodulatory in action and helps in improves immunity if used on a regular basis.
Daru (Cedrus deodara) – The extract of this plant has anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic in action. It helps to relieve pain, swelling and tenderness, due to its analgesic and anti-inflammatory property thus, beneficial in treating joint disorders.
Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) – This plant has anti-arthritic properties and it helps to pacify aggrivated vata dosha, which is responsible for pain. This herb helps in relieving symptoms of arthritis. It helps to clear toxins by regularly evacuating the bowel.
Gokshur (Tribulus terrestris) – Gokshur is diuretic in nature and it helps in the treatment of any kind of inflammation in the body.
Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) – It is a potent Ayurvedic herb with immense health benefits. This herb is anti-inflammatory in action and used in the treatment of various Vata disorders.
Errand (Ricinus communis) – It is useful in the treatment of Vata related problems such as arthritis. It is anti-inflammatory in action hence useful in the treatment of pain and swelling in rheumatic arthritis.
METHOD OF PREPARATION
First of all prepare the coarse powder of all the ingredients and add water to it. Then this mixture is boiled until it is reduced to one eighth. On completion of the process, it should be filtered with a clean cloth and used in a lukewarm state.

INDICATIONS
This kashayam preparation is a liquid formulation which is used in treating body pains such as pain in ankle, flanks, joints and pelvis region. It is also useful in the treatment of all rheumatic complaints.

USES AND BENEFITS OF RASNASAPTHAKAM KASHAYAM
 It is useful in the treatment of all kinds of Vata disorders.
 It has anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties thus beneficial in pain, stiffness, and inflammation.
 It also improves digestion, increases appetite and treats abdominal cramps as well.
DOSAGE
5 to 15 ml once or twice daily with 4 times boiled and cooled water as suggested by physician

MANUFACTURER
Arya Vaidya Pharmacy

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.

48. Trinpanchmool Ghan Vati
Maintains healthy kidneys
Supports healthy blood circulation
Maintains healthy metabolism
Balances all the three doshas or physical energies (Vata, Pitta and Kapha) in body
100% natural product
Absolutely free from chemicals, additives, extra colors, fillers and yeast etc.
Formulated by M.D Ayurveda experts
Ingredients of Trinpanchmool Ghan Vati
Trinpanchmool is a classical formulation mentioned in Charaka Samhita. In Sanskrit ‘Trin’ means ‘grass’, ‘Panch’ means ‘five’, ‘Mool’ means ‘roots’. This means trinpanchmool consists five grassroots which are mentioned in ayurvedic classics.

These are Kush (Desmostachya bipinnata), Darbh (Imperata cylindrica), Kaas (Saccharum spontaneum), Saar (Saccharum munja), Ikshu (Saccharum officinarum).

Pack size – 1 Bottle – 120 tablets

Dosage – 2 tablets twice or thrice daily after half an hour of meal with plain water.

What do You Understand by Kidney Failure?
Kidneys are bean shaped structures which are located on back side of lower abdomen. These are two in number. Kidneys are known for their excretory functions. These help to purify blood and removes toxins out with urine.

Glomeruli are tiny cultures (functional unit of kidneys) which filter your blood as it passes through the kidneys. These separate the waster products which are not needed. Glomeruli help to maintain healthy blood protein specially albumin which is needed to maintain healthy body fluid. When kidneys are damages, these are not able to perform their normal functions. This leads to kidney failure.

Stress in daily routine along with less consumption of water, suppressing natural urges because of work load results renal diseases. Reduction in the performance of kidneys leads to increase in creatinine and urea values, imbalance in electrolytes and proteins, formation of stones, urinary tract infections.

What Ayurveda Says?
Kidneys are the roots of medovaha srotas (fat tissue) and comprised of rakta and meda dhatu. Balancing these two dhatus will have positive effects on kidneys since diseases arising out of these dhatus (tissues) can affect kidneys and cause their failure.

What are Symptoms of Kidney Failure?
Tiredness
Loss of appetite
Frequent urination
Nausea
Swelling
Skin Tingling
Numbness
Lethargy
Low concentration
Darkened skin
Muscle cramp
Accumulation of fluid in lungs
Anemia
Muscle cramp
Accumulation of fluid in lungs
Anemia
What are Causes of Kidney Failure?
High blood pressure
Diabetes
Genetic diseases like polycystic kidney disease
Chronic pyelonephritis
Some medicines or other drugs
Tuberculosis of kidney
Injury
What is Trinapanchmoola Ghana Vati?
Planet Ayurveda brings Trinpanchmoola formulation in the form of tablet with the name Trinpanchmool Ghan Vati. The Ayurvedic herbal formulation trinpanchmool Ghan Vati is a 100% pure natural product.

Individually all the ingredients of Trinpanchmoolghana vati balance pitta and are cooling and soothing in nature.

Can it be taken on Regular Basis?
In kidney failure water gets accumulated in body and leads to swelling and inflammation.

Trinapanchmoola Ghana Vati can be taken or regular basis to maintain healthy water volume, kidneys and whole urinary system.

What are Dietary Guidelines?
Add to your Diet –
Butter milk
Coconut water
Older rice
Green gram soup (Mudga Yusha)
Minimize or take in moderation – yogurt, sour cream etc.
Use of cooling fragrances like lavender, rose, sandalwood, mint
Must Avoid –
Skipping of meals
Protein rich diets (protein dissociates into urea and amino acids)
Decrease sodium in your diet (table salt)
Avoid Eating fresh fruit or juice within 1/2 hr. of meals.
Suppression of natural urges
Excess indulgence in sexual activities
Excess of salty, spicy and astringent foods
Excess walking
Non vegetarian diet
Excess sun exposure
Lack of sleep


49. Varunadi Vati – Renal Stones and Urinary Tract Infection
Varunadi Vati is a classical Ayurvedic herbal product in tablet shape, formed from the purest extracts taken from the herb Varun along with other herbs. The best quality Varun is taken for its production. This herb is collected from the cleanest environment and trees grow in the best soils are used. The processing and packaging of the tablet is done using the best technology. There is minimal human intervention so as to ensure that the purest product reaches the consumer. The regular usage of Ayurvedic Varunadi vati reduces the chances of kidney stones and urinary tract infection. Varunadi vati also helps to reduce toxins accumulated due to insufficient kidneys. For example urea and creatinine. A pure Ayurvedic product formed that works wonderfully on the renal stones and urinary tract infections.

Cures urinary tract infections.
Relieves renal stone pain.
Helps to remove renal stones naturally thereby preventing surgeries.
Ingredients and Uses Of Varunadi Vati
What are Varunadi vati tablets?
The Varunadi Vati is an Ayurvedic preparation. Varunadi vati are prepared from herbs like Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa), Varun (Crataeva nurvala), Gokshur (Tribulus terrestris) and Shuddha Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) that give effective results in urinary tract problems. Along with these, there are other potential herbs that are used in the formulation. The herbs used are pure and natural. Varunadi vati is formulated in the tablet form. It helps to reduce pain of renal stones. There is no side effects of the tablet.

What are the Benefits of Varunadi Vati ?
The benefits of Varun have been used and tested by physicians since the ancient times. These tablets are highly beneficial for urinary tract infections.

Some of the Benefits Offered by Varunadi Tablets are:
Using Varunadi Vati helps in reducing the excruciating pain caused by renal stones. The pain of renal stones is intolerable and the patient tosses around due to the torture caused. Immediate action of Varunadi is to bring in relief to the victim.
Regular use of Varunadi prevents surgery for stones. Ayurveda promises to cure stones and save you from undergoing surgeries.
The modern medicines that claim to crush and break stones inside the kidneys can lead to various complications and side effects. Stone pieces could block the urinary tract and lead to further pain to the patient. In contrast to these the Ayurvedic herbal preparation Varunadi Vati dissolve the stones in the kidney and let them pass naturally through urine. This causes no pain and discomfort.
The stones can block the urinary tract and leads to UTI. This Ayurvedic herbal product Varunadi Vati helps cure the UTI.
The Natural Ayurvedic herbs used in the product leave behind no side effects and also prevent stone formation in the future.
Varunadi Vati helps to reduce urea and creatinine levels in body.
To buy Varunadi Vati, please visit store.planetayurveda.com/products/varunadi-vati

How To Use?
How can I use Varunadi vati daily?
Varunadi Vati Ayurvedic tablets are an easily available, convenient to use veggie tablet formulation that should be consumed as a whole with water.

Adults can take a daily dosage of 2-4 tablets twice with plain water after meals.

For children 1-2 tablets per day is the recommended dose.

The natural, herbal nature of Varun leaves show no side effects. Its regular usage for long periods is considered safe. The tablet can be used as per choice and there are no withdrawal or habit forming symptoms seen.

Caution: However, Varun has no known side effects, pregnant females and lactating mothers should consume it only under medical supervision. People consuming hypoglycemic drugs may need to alter the dosage of their drugs along with this product.

How Long would Varunadi Vati take to Show Results?
Varunadi is a complete pure form of the best high-quality herbal product. For the reason that it is a 100% pure Ayurvedic formula without any adulteration, it starts natural action as soon as you start taking the tablets. The visible outer effects may take about 4-6 weeks to appear. Therefore, it is recommended that the user be patient to experience the wonderful effects of the remedy.

In certain cases the results may also be delayed depending upon the medical condition of the individual, such like his mental health, physical illnesses and also the metabolic condition of the body. There have been cases where individuals show results within a week.

The effects of herbal preparations are natural and everlasting in contrast to the immediate yet short- termed results given by the pharmaceutical drugs. These natural drugs work on the individual’s immunity thereby curing the individual as a whole. This may take a certain longer period of time but the effects are there to stay!!

So as to ensure best outcome, it is recommended to consume the product regularly per the recommended dosage. Regular intake of Varun is highly recommended for overall healthy body.

How long will a Single Bottle of Varunadi Vati Tablets Last?
A single bottle of Varunadi contains 120 herbal natural tablets. A bottle should last anywhere from 15 to 30 days depending upon the dosage and frequency of consumption. For best results regular intake of the tablets is highly recommended.

Research
The herb Varun is a frequently used herb in the herbal medicines. Its multiple benefits and health results have drawn attention of researchers throughout the world. Many scientist and students have taken up the study of this powerful herb.

Research has proved its wonderful actions on the kidney stones.
Studies prove it to be a great anti-biotic and it therefore prevents infections.
Urinary tract infections are treated by using Varunadi Vati.

50. Vasaguluchyadi Kashayam
Reference: Ashtanga Hridayam Chikitsa Sthana 16/13, Sahasrayogam.
Vasaguluchyadi Kashayam is a very effective Ayurvedic liquid formulation which is also known as Vasaguduchyadi Kwatha, etc. It has potent hepato-protective effect.

Ingredients
Vasa – Adhatoda vasica
Guduchi – Giloy – Tinospora cordifolia
Triphala – (Haritaki – Terminalia chebula, Vibhitaki – Terminalia bellirica and Amalaki – Emblica officinalis)
Katvi – Picrorrhiza kurroa
Bhunimba – Andrographis paniculata
Neem – Azadirachta indica
How to Make?
Above mentioned ingredients are boiled using water till reduced to 1/4th part and then filtered.

Dosage
Take 12 – 24 ml, before food, at about 6 – 7am and 6 – 7 pm or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Indications
Anemia
Jaundice
Liver complications such as fatty liver
Pitta imbalance
Bleeding disorders
Side Effects
There are no known side effects with this medicine.

Over dose may induce gastric irritation.

Note – Use this medicine under medical supervision.

People with diabetes need special care as this product may alter blood sugar levels, temporarily.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


51. Amritadi Guggulu – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Bhavaprakasha Madhyama Khanda, Vatarakta Chikitsa
Amritadi Guggulu is a polyherbal classical Ayurvedic medicine. It is used for the treatment of various diseases like piles, gout, skin diseases, rheumatoid arthritis, fistula, decreased digestive power. It is also useful in the management of obesity. This Ayurvedic preparation balances all the three doshas, predominantly vata and Pitta.

Ingredients
Guduchi – Tinospora cordifolia – 1 Prastha – 768 g
Guggulu – Commiphora mukul – ardha prastha – 384 g
Triphala (Haritaki, Vibhitaki, Amalaki) – 384 g
Danti – Baliospermum montanum – 24 g
Vyosha – 24 g
Maricha – Black pepper – 24 g
Pippali – Long pepper – 24 g
Shunti – Ginger – 24 g
Vidanga – False black pepper – Embelia ribes – 24 g
Guduchi – Giloy – Tinospora cordifolia – 24 g
Triphala – Haritaki, Vibhitaki, Amalaki – 24 g
Tvacha – Cinnamon bark – 24 g
Trivrut – Operculina turpethum – Karsha – 12 g
Method of Manufacturing
Guduchi and Guggulu are taken along with Triphala. Then added in the double quantity of water.
These ingredients are boiled in the wide mouthed vessel till water reduces to a quarter half.
Filtration is done to remove the impurities of Gum guggul.
After filtration, obtained herbal decoction (Kashaya) is heated till it becomes thick.
Added the 24 grams of each of the rest of the ingredients mentioned above, in the herbal decoction (Kashaya).
A semi-solid mass is formed. It is mixed well and pills of the size of 500 mg are rolled.
Dosage
2-6 tablets twice in a day with hot water or as directed by the physician.

Indications
Piles
Fistula
Wounds
Skin diseases
Loss of appetite
Weight loss
Abscesses (internal abscesses)
Liver disorders
Digestive impairment
Chikungunya
Inflammation and swelling
Gout or raised uric acid levels
Acne or pimples
Arthritis
Side effects
This medicine should be avoided by the people having IBS – diarrhea, sensitive stomach and diarrhea.
Avoid this medicine during pregnancy and lactation.
It can worsen gastritis in few cases.
It is advisable to avoid this medicine in children below 6 years of age or prescribed only in lower doses.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


52. Gokshuradi Guggulu – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Sharangadhara samhita, Madhyama khanda 7/84-87
Gokshuradi Guggulu is the combination of many herbs which are traditionally used in Ayurveda for Pitta (Fire) and Vata (Air) related problems of genital system and urinary tract. It helps in the elimination of toxins from body and supports good health of urinary system. Major ingredient of this Ayurvedic preparation is “Gokshura” that helps to rejuvenate, tones the kidney, bladder, urethra as well as reproductive organs. It balances all the tri-doshas (vata, pitta and kapha) in body. Gokshuradi guggulu helps to revitalize the kidneys and also helps to maintain good health of male and female reproductive system.

Ingredients
Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris) – 1.344 kg
Purified guggulu (Commiphora Mukul) – 336 g
Trikatu – Black pepper (Piper nigrum), Long pepper (Piper longum) and Ginger (Zingiber officinale) – 48 g
Triphala – Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Bibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica) Amla (Emblica officinalis) – 48 g
Musta – (Cyperus rotundus) – 48 g
Water – 8.064 liters
Method of Preparation
Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris) 1.344 kg is boiled in 8.064 liters of water until it reduced to its half. Purified guggulu – 336 g. is heated to semi solid consistency. Then these preparations are added with 48 g of each of:-

Trikatu – Black pepper (Piper nigrum), Long pepper (Piper longum) and Ginger (Zingiber officinale)
Triphala – Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Bibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica) Amla (Emblica officinalis)
Musta – Cyperus rotundus.
Finally tablets are made.

Dosage
Take 1 – 2 tablets 2 – 3 times a day, before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.
Usually this medicine is administered along with water decoction of Musta, Pashanabheda, and Usheera etc.
Indications
Maintains the healthy flow of urine.
It is good to resolve the problem of white discharge in females.
Strengthen the reproductive system in both males and females.
It helps to break up the stones of urinary tract.
This tablet is quite effective to maintain the normal level of uric acid in body.
Helps to control the problems related to enlarged prostate in males.
Improves the quality & quantity of sperms in males.
It helps to control the problem of bed wetting in children.
The tablets eliminate toxins from body.
Beneficial for the treatment of Kidney stones.
Reduces burning sensation during urination.
Treats the Osteoarthritis
Effective in Urinary tract infections (UTIs)
Menorrhagia
High blood pressure
Congestive heart failure
Side Effects
Although, there are no known side effects of this medicine. But it is advisable to take this medicine under the medical supervision.
Very high dose than prescribed may lead to stomach irritation.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


53. Vidangarishta – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Sharangdhara Samhita
Introduction
Vidangarishta is a herbal formulation which comprises of 5-10 percent of autogenic alcohol in it. This self -produced alcohol and water present in the product act as a mediator to transport water and active alcohol dissolving herbal substances to the body.

Vidangarishta can also be called Vidangarist, Vidangarishtam, Vidangarishta. It is used as a herbal antidote for abscess and for curing thigh cramps, urinary calculi, wry neck and fistula.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
Kwatha Dravya (herbs for decoction)
1.	Vidanga	Embelia ribes		240 g
2.	Pippalamool	Piper longum	Root	240 g
3.	Pippali	Piper longum	Fruit	384g
4.	Rasna	Pluchea lanceolata		240 g
5.	Kutaja	Holarrhena antidysenterica		240 g
6.	Patha	Cyclea peltata		240 g
7.	Ela/cardamom	Eletteria cardamomum		240 g
8.	Dhatri/Indian gooseberry	Emblica officianalis		240 g
Sandhana dravya (Fermentative agents)
9.	Madhu/Honey			14.4 kg
Prakshepa dravyas (Herbal additives for aroma and accelerating the process of fermentation)
10.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa		960 g
11.	Twak/Cinnamon	Cinnamomum verum		96 g
12.	Patra	Cinnamomum tamala		96 g
13.	Ela/cardamom	Eletteria cardamomum		96 g
14.	Priyangu	Callicarpa macrophylla		48 g
15.	Kanchanara	Bauhinia variegata		48 g
16.	Lodhra	Symplocos racemosa		48 g
17.	Shunti/Dry ginger	Zingiber officinale		384 g
18.	Maricha/Black Pepper	Piper nigrum		384 g
Method of Preparation
The Kwatha dravyas (decoction herbs) are washed and dried and crushed to form a coarse powder. After that these are added in 98.304 liters of water and boiled till the amount is reduced to 12.288 litres. The decoction is then filtered, the sandhana dravya and the prakshepa dravyas are added to this and stirred to form a homogenous mix. The obtained decoction is then transferred to a clean container coated with ghee and kept away for fermentation for a period of 30 days. When the process of fermentation is completed, the constituents are strained and is stored in amber colored bottles in a cool, dry and dark place.

Dosage
12 – 24 ml mixed with equal quantity of water after meals two times a day.

Indications
Stiffness in thigh muscles
Polyuria
Locked jaw
Calculus
Fistula-in-ano
Cervical lymphadenitis
Contraindications
This formulation should be avoided during pregnancy, but it can be consumed during the lactation period under medical supervision. Diabetic patients should also consult a doctor before taking this medicine. Over dosage should be avoided.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


54. Kaishore Guggulu – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Sharangdhar Samhita, Madhyama Khanda 7/70-81
Kaishore Guggulu is also called as Kishore Guggul. This Ayurvedic medicine acts as the natural blood cleanser. This herbal product is used for inflammatory diseases, raised uric acid, gout arthritis, wounds, abdominal diseases, constipation, indigestion & diabetic carbuncles etc. Furthermore it also helps to improve the functions of stomach and intestines by removing the toxins from the body.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Triphala (Haritaki, Vibhitaki and Amalaki fruit rind)	(Terminalia chebula, Terminalia bellirica, Phyllanthus emblica)		2.304 kg
2.	Water (Ardha Drona)			6.144 liters
3.	Amrita (Guduchi)	Tinospora cordifolia		768 g
4.	Guggulu	Commiphora mukul		768 g
5.	Trikatu (Pepper, Long Pepper and Ginger)	(Piper nigrum, Piper longum, Zingiber officinale)		72 g
6.	Vidanga (False Black pepper)	Embelia ribes		24 g
7.	Danti	Baliospermum montanum	Root	12 g
8.	Trivrit	Operculina turpethum		12 g
9.	Ghrita			Quantity Sufficient
Method of preparation
Given amounts of Triphala and Amrita (Guduchi) are taken in coarse powder form.
It is added with 6.144 liters of water in an iron vessel and boiled until it reduces to its half quantity.
To the filtered decoction, guggulu (Commiphora mukul) is added. It is heated further with continuous stirring and pounding till it reaches Gudapaka (semisolid) consistency. Then filtration is done.
It is taken out of fire and is added with fine powder of rest of the herbs.
The total quantity is mixed well and it is taken into a vessel which is smeared with ghee (so that the mass does not stick to the vessel and it will be easy to roll into pills).
Then, pills are rolled.
Dosage
Take two tablets two or three times a day, after food.

Indications
Helps in elimination of toxins from the joints
Raised uric acid levels and gouty arthritis
Blood Purifier
Reduces the inflammation and swelling
Fever due to joints pain
Tendonitis (inflammation of tendons)
Fibromyalgia
Rheumatic fever
Rheumatoid arthritis
Supports healthy metabolism
Helps in maintaining healthy white blood cells
Repetitive motion injuries or stress injuries
Muscle cramps or stiffness
Inflammatory diseases of muscles
Side Effects
People suffering from gastritis, diarrhoea and dysentery should take precaution, while taking this medicine.

This medicine should be taken only under the supervision of physician.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


55. Lakshadi Guggul – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali Amavatarogadhikara 90 – 95.
Lakshadi Guggul, is an Ayurvedic herbal preparation which is very useful to treat the diseases of bones. This Ayurvedic preparation is used to treat the various problems like low bone mineral density, osteoporosis, osteoarthritis and other diseases related to bones, teeth, joints and muscles. It helps in restoring the bone mass, strengthening bones, joints and muscles etc. The Anti-inflammatory, analgesic properties of this medicine are quite effective to the reduce the inflammation of joints and alleviate the pain.

Effect on Tridoshas
Calms Vata

Ingredients
Laksha – Laccifer lacca
Asthisamhrut – Cissus quadrangularis
Arjuna – Terminalia arjuna
Ashwagandha – Withania somnifera
Nagabala – Grewia populifolia
Guggulu – Purified Commiphora mukul.
Method of preparation
All the above mentioned ingredients are pounded with guggulu and rolled into pills of uniform size of 500 mg.

Dosage
Take 1-2 tablets twice or thrice in a day, before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Indications
Osteoporosis
Fasten the healing process of bone fracture.
Low bone mineral density or Osteopenia
Pain in bones
Weakness of bones
Bone fractures
Bursitis
Fibromyalgia and muscle cramps or spasms
Stiffness in joints and strained muscles
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Inflammatory diseases of bones, muscles and joints
Repetitive motion injury
Sprains
Tendonitis
Side Effects
Always take the medicine as per advised by an Ayurvedic doctor.
There are no known side effects with this medicine. However it is best to use this product under medical supervision.
Self-medication with this medicine is discouraged.
Very high dose than prescribed may lead to stomach irritation.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


56. Navaka Guggulu
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali Medoroga Chikitsa 39/43
Navaka Guggulu is an amazing herbal formulation in the weight management. It is anti-obesity and antihyperlipidemic Ayurvedic medicine. It helps to reduce the elevated lipids, cholesterol, triglycerides, low-density lipoprotein etc. This Ayurvedic medicine is quite effective in reducing the fat accumulation. It also improves the fat metabolism and its usability. It is also used for the treatment of the rheumatoid arthritis. It calms vata and kapha.

Ingredients
Trikatu (Pepper – Piper nigrum – 48 g, Long pepper – Piper longum – 48 g, Ginger – Zingiber officinalis – 48 g)
Triphala (Haritaki – Terminalia chebula – 48 g, Vibhitaki – Terminalia bellirica – 48 g, Amalaki – Emblica officinalis – 48 g)
Chitrak – Plumbago zeylanica – 48 g
Nagarmotha – Cyperus rotundus – 48 g
Vidanga – Embelia ribes – 48 g
Guggulu – Commiphora mukul – 48 g
Method of Preparation
The fine powder of all the above are mixed and punched into the form of tablet of 500 mg size.

Dosage
Take 1 – 2 tablets, two to thrice in a day, before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Indications
Used in treatment of weight loss.
Improves digestion.
Controls the cholesterol.
It is also used to relieve Rheumatoid arthritis.
Obesity
Hyperlipidemia, Dyslipidemia, Hypercholesterolemia
Fatty Liver Disease (Hepatic Steatosis)
Side Effects
There are no known side effects with this medicine. However it is best to use this medicine under medical supervision.
Self-medication with this medicine is discouraged.
Very high dose than prescribed may lead to stomach irritation
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


57. Rasnadi Kashayam (Kwath) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Sahasrayogam, Kshaya Prakarna
Introduction
Rasnadi Kashayam (Kwath) helps in curing rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis as it has anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties. Rasnadi Kashayam (Kwath) is a liquid formulation.

Ingredients
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata)
Stone breaker (Phyllanthus niruri)
Malabar nut (Adhatoda vasica)
Agaru/Eaglewood (Aquilaria agallocha)
Shati/Ginger lily (Hedychium spicatum)
Wild leadwort (Plumbago zeylanica)
Purple nut (Cyperus rotundus)
Chavya (Piper cubeba)
Mountain knot grass (Aerva lanata)
Indian Barberry (Berberis aristata)
Bag flower (Clerodendron serratum)
Pointed gourd (Trichosanthes dioica)
Pushkarmool (Inula racemosa)
Turmeric (Curcuma longa)
Porcupine flower (Barleria Prionitis)
Ginger (Zingiber officinalis)
Leadwort (Plumbago zeylanica)
Wood apple (Aegle marmelos)
Indian trumpet flower (Oroxylum indicum)
English beechwood (Gmelina arborea)
Rose flower fragrant (Stereospermum suaveolens)
Indian headache tree (Premna mucronata)
Sal leaved desmodium (Desmodium gangeticum)
Prishnaparni (Uraria picta)
Brihati (Solanum indicum)
Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum)
Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris)
Daru (Cedrus deodara)
Method of Preparation
Add 8 parts of water to these herbs and boil them till the amount is reduced to 1/4th part. Filter the mixture and store the filtrate in a clean container.

Dosage
12 to 24 ml of this formulation can be mixed with equal amounts of water and consumed before meals.

Indications
Rheumatoid arthritis
Osteoarthritis
Contraindications
There are no reported side effects of this formulation.
It should be taken under strict medical supervision.
Self-medication should be shunned.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


58. Simhanada Guggulu
Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali – Amavata adhikara 130 – 135
Introduction
Simhanada Guggulu is an Ayurvedic tablet formulation. This tablet has Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) as its main ingredients. It is useful in gout, skin disease, abdominal disorders, joint pains, swelling, stiffness and inflammation etc. It has purgative action, which helps in detoxification and increases the toxin elimination from the body.

Ingredients
Triphala – Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Bibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica), Amla (Emblica officinalis)
Purified Gandhaka
Purified Guggulu (Commiphora mukul)
Chitrataila – Castor oil
How to Make?
Prepare a decoction of triphala using water added with castor oil, then further heated with the addition of purified gandhak and guggulu then finally rolled into pills.

Dosage
1 – 2 tablets 2 – 3 times a day, after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Indications
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Hyperuricemia and Gout
Cough & Bronchitis
Constipation
Intestinal Gas
Abdominal diseases mainly related or associated with constipation and excess gas
Skin Diseases – mainly itching with pain
Premature Graying Of Hair
Hair loss
Side effects
There are no known side effects with this medicine. However it is best to use this product under medical supervision. It high dose may cause severe side effects.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


59. Saptavinshati Guggulu – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Bhagandara Chikitsa
Saptavinshati Guggulu is a famous Ayurvedic guggulu tablet used in quick healing of wounds, sinuses, skin diseases, etc. The word Samptavinshati means, it has seven ingredients. It is named Guggulu because the guggulu is the main ingredient of this tablet. Interesting fact about Saptavishanti Guggulu is, most of the other guggulu products are used in treating joint conditions, blunt injuries etc. But this is used in haematological conditions.

Ingredients used in Saptavinshati Guggulu
Shunthi (Zingiber officinale)
Marich (Piper nigrum)
Pippali (Piper longum)
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)
Bibhitaki (Terminalia belerica)
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis)
Kushtha (Saussurea costus)
Vidanga (Embelia ribes)
 Amrita (Guduchi) (Tinospora cordifolia)
Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica)
Shati (Hedychium spicatum)
Ela (Elettaria cardamomum)
Pippali mula (Pippali) (Piper longum)
Havusha (Juniperus communis)
Suradaru (Devadaru) (Cedrus deodara)
Tumburu (Tejovati) (Zanthoxylum aromaticum)
Pushkara (Saussurea costus)
Cavya (Piper refrofractum)
Vishala (Rakta Indravaruni) (Citrullus colocynthis)
Haridra (Curcuma longa)
Daruharidra (Berberis aristata)
Vida Lavana
Sauvarcala Lavana
Yavakshara (Yava) (Hordeum vulgare)
Sarjika Kshara (Svarji Kshara)
Saindhava Lavana
Gajppali (Scindapsus officinalis)
Shuddha Guggulu (Commiphora wightii)
Method of Preparation
Crush good quality of Shuddha – Guggulu, add fine powder of other mixed ingredients to it and pound well. Add Ghrita in small quantity at regular intervals for smooth pounding and continue pounding till a semi-solid uniformly mixed mass of suitable plasticity is obtained. Roll this into form of tablets on flat surface to round them by circular motion of palm covered with a glove and smeared with Ghrita or use suitable mechanical device. Dry these rounded tablets or Vatis in a tray-dryer at a temperature not exceeding 600 for 8 to 10 h.

Dosage
3 grams, once or twice a day, or as directed by physician. It can be given along with honey.

Indications
Piles, fistula, ulcers
Heart problems like angina pectoris, pain in heart
Epilepsy, psychosis
Skin problems
Respiratory problems like asthma, cough, and sinus
Pain
Side Effects
As it is safe for short term use and use under medical supervision.
Its overdose may cause worsening of gastritis.
Note – Best to avoid this product in children, pregnant ladies and lactating mothers.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.

60. Triphala Guggulu
Reference: Sharangadhara Samhita madhyama khanda 7/82-83
Introduction
Triphala Guggulu, Ayurvedic medicine in tablet form is a well-balanced combination of two very efficient herbs, where Triphala is one of the most effective bowel cleanser, Guggulu acts as an effective defense agent for the body. It is a good anti-inflammatory, anti-viral agent also.

Ingredients
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) – 48 g
Vibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica) – 48 g
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) – 48 g
Pippali – Long pepper – 48 g
Guggulu – Purified Commiphora mukul.
Method of Preparation
All ingredients Haritaki, Vibhitaki, Amalaki, and Pippali are powdered together and added to Guggulu and finally it is rolled into pills of uniform size around 500 mg.

Dosage
Consume 1-2 tablets 2-3 times a day, before or after meals or as suggested by Ayurvedic doctor.

Therapeutic Uses
Widely used for weight loss as Triphala being the main ingredient which helps to control cholesterol.
Cleansing and toning effect on gastrointestinal tract, maintaining healthy digestion and providing relief from Piles, fistula and inflammatory conditions.
Ayurvedic Remedy for acne.
Treats osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
Suitable for various heart related disorders and improves liver functions.
Controls high blood pressure and anxiety levels as well act as anti-depressant.
Beneficial in fatigue, constipation, diabetes, low metabolism, sinusitis, allergies, sinus congestion, rheumatism, arthritis, hemorrhoids, toxemia, hyperglycemia, general debility, brittle nails, inflammation, flatulence, dullness in skin, myopia, headaches.
Contraindications/ Side Effects
Guggulu is considered as promoter of menstrual blood and stimulates urine flow. Therefore must be avoided during Pregnancy.
Self-medication with this medicine is discouraged.
It is better to use this product under medical supervision.
Very high dose than prescribed may lead to stomach irritation.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


61. Trayodashang Guggul
Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali Vataroga Adhikara 89-92
Trayodashang Guggul is a very famous Ayurvedic medicine. It is in tablet form. It is also known as Trayodasanga Guggul tablets, Trayodasanga Guggulu etc. It is widely used in the Ayurvedic treatment of joint pain related disorders. Here, Guggulu is treated with 13 ingredients. So the name Trayodashang.

Ingredients
Abha – Acacia nilotica Linn. / indica / arabica Willd
Ashwagandha – Withania somnifera
Hapusha – Juniperus communis Linn
Guduchi – Tinospora cordifolia
Shatavari – Asparagus racemosus
Gokshura – Tribulus terrestris
Vriddhadaru – Argyreia speciosa
Rasna – Pluchea lanceolata
Shatahva – Anethum sowa Kurz
Shati – Hedychium spicatum
Yavani – Trachispermum amami
Ginger – Zingiber officinale
Purified Guggulu – Commiphora mukul
Sarpi – ghee
Method of Preparation
Make a fine powder of all ingredients and guggulu is added into it and then rolled into pills.

Dose
1-2 tablets 2-3 times a day, after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor. It is administered along with gruel, warm water, alcohol, and milk or meat soup.

Indications
Paralysis
Facial paralysis
Hemiplegia
Sciatica
Pain of neurological origin
Osteoarthritis
Bone pain
Osteoporosis or low bone mineral density
Muscle spasm
Backache
Side Effects
There are no known side effects with this medicine. However it is best to use this product under medical supervision. Its high dose may cause stomach irritation.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


62. Punarnavadi Guggulu
Reference: Bharat Bhaishajya Ratnakar 3:4012
Introduction
Punarnavadi Guggulu is an Ayurvedic medicine in tablet form. It is used in the treatment of gout, sciatica, low back ache etc. It helps to maintain healthy fluid level in body & helps to reduce the problems caused by water retention like swelling in body due to fluid accumulation.

Ingredients
Punarnava (Boerhaavia diffusa)
Erand (Ricinus communis)
Shunti (Zingiber officinalis)
Guggulu (Commiphora mukul)
Castor oil (Ricinus communis)
Trivrit (Operculina turpethum)
Nikumbha (Baliospermum montanum)
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia)
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)
Vibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica)
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis)
Maricha (Piper nigrum)
Pippali (Piper longum)
Saindhava Lavana – Rock salt
Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium)
Vidanga (Embelia ribes)
Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa)
Makshika Bhasma (Bhasma of Copper-Iron Pyrite)
How to Make?
All the ingredients are pounded and then rolled into pills.

Dosage
1 – 2 tablets, once or twice a day before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Indications
Gout
Diuretic
Anti-inflammatory
Hepatoprotective
Cardio protective
Antihyperlipidemic
Sciatica
Low back ache
Spondylitis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Other skeleto-muscular and joint disorders.
Maintains healthy kidney functions.
Helps to maintain and balance fluids/water in the body
Improves circulation of fluids
Inflammation & swelling
Side Effects
In prescribed dose is safe for use under medical supervision but its over-dosage may cause burning sensation and gastritis.

Note – Diabetic, hypertensive patients, pregnant ladies, lactating mothers and children should take this medicine strictly under medical supervision.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


63. Yogaraja Churnam
Reference: Sahasrayoga Churna Prakarana 71, Rasa Ratna Samuccaya
Yogaraja Churnam, an Ayurvedic medicine which is available in the form of powder. It is effective ayurvedic treatment for piles and fistula. It pacifies the vata and kapha doshas in body.

Ingredients
Equal quantities of herbal powders of:-
Pippali – Piper longum
Pippalimoola – Piper longum (root)
Chavya – Piper brachystachyum
Chitraka – Plumbago zeylanica
Dry ginger – Zingiber officinale
Vidanga – Embelia ribes
Indrayava – Holarrhena antidysenterica
Hingu – Ferula asafetida
Bharngi – Clerodendron serratum
Vacha – Acorus calamus
Sarshapa – Brassica alba
Ativisha – Aconitum heterophyllum
Ajaji – Nigella sativa
Jiraka – Cuminum cyminum
Kushta – Saussurea lappa
Gajakrishna – Scindapsus officinalis
Ajamoja – Apium graveolens
Kalmegh – Andrographis paniculata
Moorva – Chenomorpha fragrans
Guggulu – Commiphora mukul
Method of Preparation
Crush all the above mentioned ingredients, made fine powder. Mixed well to form the Yogaraja Churnam.

Dosage
Take 1-3 grams once or twice a day before or after food as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

It is usually administered along with honey or warm water.

Indications
Piles
Fistula
Anorexia
Bloating
Dyspepsia
Rheumatism
Asthma
Cough
Jaundice
Anemia
Side Effects
There are no known side effects with this Ayurvedic medicine.
Pregnant ladies should avoid oral intake of this product.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


64. Brahmi Ghrita – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Ashtanga Hridayam Uttarsthana 6/23-25
Brahmi Ghrita is a very famous Ayurvedic medicine available in the herbal ghee form. This medicine has ghee as its base. It is mainly used for treatment of improving intelligence, learning skills and speech. It balances the vata, pitta and kapha.

Ingredients
Brahmi – Bacopa monnieri juice extract – 1.536 liters
Ghrita – 768 ml
12 g of each of:-
Trikatu – Pepper, long pepper and ginger
Shweta and Krishna Trivrit – Operculina turpethum
Danti – Baliospermum montanum
Shankhapushpi – Clitorea ternatea
Nripadruma – Cassia fistula
Saptala – Acacia sinuata
Krumihara – Embelia ribes
Dosage
As medicine – quarter to half teaspoon with water, usually before food, once or twice a day, or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor. It is usually administered with warm water.

Use of Brahmi Ghrita as a Brain Tonic for Healthy People
Healthy people can take Brahmi Ghrita as a brain tonic just before your morning cup of coffee / tea / milk. You can take it for up to two months.

Indications
Improving learning skills
Intelligence
Memory
Speech
Skin diseases
Epilepsy and female infertility
Impotency
Depression
Fatigue
Myalgia
Stress disorder
Side Effects
There are no known side effects with this medicine.
It is best to use this product under medical supervision.
Self-medication with this medicine is discouraged.
People with diabetes, high cholesterol, heart diseases and high BP should exercise precaution.
In very high dose, it may cause diarrhea and indigestion.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


65. Dadimadi Ghrita
Reference: Ashtanga Hridayam chikitsa sthana 13/2-4, Charaka Samhita Chikitsa sthana, 16/44-46.
Dadimadi Ghrita is an Ayurvedic medicine, in herbal ghee form. This medicine has ghee as its base. Dadimadi states the pomegranate which is the major ingredient of this medicine. It balances vata and kapha dosha in body. This Ayurvedic medicine is used to treat the various diseases like heart diseases, anemia, piles etc. Moreover this medicine is used to treat the infertility in women, improves the chances and also ease of normal delivery.

Ingredients
Dadima – Pomegranate – Punica granatum – 192 g
Dhanya – Coriander – 96 g
Chitraka – Plumbago zeylanica – 48 g
Shringavera – ginger – 48 g
Pippali – Long pepper – 24 g
Ghrita – ghee – 960 g
Water – 3.072 liters
Method of preparation
The above combination is heated till herbal ghee is prepared.

Dosage
Quarter to half teaspoon with water, usually before food, once or twice a day, or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.
It is usually administered with warm water.
Benefits
Heart diseases
Anemia
Piles
Spleen diseases
Cough
Asthma
Splenomegaly
Abdominal tumor
Hemorrhoids
Side Effects
There are no known side effects with this medicine.
This medicine should be taken only under medical supervision.
In very high dose, it may cause diarrhea and indigestion.
Self-medication with this medicine is discouraged.
People with diabetes, high cholesterol, heart diseases and high BP should exercise precaution.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


66. Guggulu Panchapala Churnam – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Sahasrayogam, Churna Prakarna
Introduction
Guggulu Panchapala Churnam is a well-known herbal formulation in the form of a powder. It helps in curing skin disorders. It is primarily based on skin diseases and rectal fistula.

Ingredients
Guggulu (Commiphora mukul)
Pippali / Long pepper (Piper longum)
Triphala (Powdered Myrobalans)
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)
Bibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica)
Amla (Phyllanthus emblica)
Cinnamon (Cinnamomum zeylanica)
Cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum)
Method of Preparation
Clean and grind all the ingredients separately to obtain fine powder of the herbs. Mix all the powdered herbs till they are homogenous.

Indications
Skin disorders
Anal fistula
Abdominal tumours
Bloating
Worm infestation
Dosage
1 to 3 grams based on the intensity of the disease along with honey after meals.

Contraindications
There are no reported side effects.
People who have gastritis should consume this medicine after having something.
Over dosage might lead to gastritis.
It should be avoided in pregnancy, lactation and children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


67. Jatimukuladi Varti
Reference – Ashtanga Hridayam Uttarsthan 11/ 9
Abstract
Ayurveda is a vast and ancient form of medicine which has given different formulations such as tablets, powders, asava, aristha, lehyam, varti, lepa, etc. So, Jati mukuadi varti is a formulation in the form of wick shape which has elongated ends. It is used as an external application in affected eyes. This varti preparation is used to manage ophthalmic disorders like redness, itching, etc. In this article we will discuss Jati mukuladi varti ingredients, method of preparation, indications and dosage.

Introduction
Jatimukuladi varti is a polyherbal medicine which is described in our classics for various types of eye related disorders. As the name suggests, it contains jati/ jasmine flower buds as its primary ingredients, and it has a very strong cooling effect. So Jatimukuadi varti helps in reducing burning sensation, itching, pain, wounds, ulcers like conditions. These days to increase its accessibility, drops form are also available which heals all eye congestion, wounds.

Classical Indication Of Jatimukuladi Varti
According to classics, this jatimukuladi varti is described by Acharya Vagbhata for local application in any allergic conditions related to eyes. Among all doshas it helps in pacifying aggravated pitta and kapha dosha. The classical indications are described below-

Shoot (swelling)
Kandu (itching)
Ingredients Of Jatimukuladi Varti
The list of ingredients used for preparation of Jatimukuladi varti are-

Jati (Jasminum grandiflorum) – 1part
Saindhava (Rock salt) – 1part
Devdaru (Cedrus deodara) – 1part
Maha aushadhi / sunth (Zingiber officinalis) – 1part
Prasana (fermented preparation) – quantity sufficient
Benefits Of Ingredients
Jati (Jasminum grandiflorum) – Jasmine flower buds are used which have great soothing and cooling effects. It helps in reducing pain, swelling, inflammation in the eyes.
Saindhava (Rock salt) – Rock salt has anti bacterial, antiviral and antifungal properties so it prevents eyes from any type of infections. It helps in healing wounds, congestion.
Devdaru (Cedrus deodara) – Devdaru has healing properties so it is used in anjana these days. It reduces watery, itching of eyes as it mainly acts on aggravated kapha dosha.
Maha aushadhi / sunth (Zingiber officinalis) – Dry ginger helps in reducing redness, puffiness and itching in the eyes. It improves blood circulation to the eyes and remains moistened.
Prasana (fermented preparation) – It is alcoholic formulated prepared by fermentation so it acts as antiseptic, disinfectant to the eyes or allergic conditions.
Method Of Preparation
The steps for preparation of Jatimukuladi varti are as following-

Firstly collect all the drugs mentioned above and wash them properly.
Then keep the drugs for drying in the shade.
Prepare fine powder of all the drugs separately.
Mix all the powders of the drugs and triturate them in a clean vessel.
Then add prasanna to the powderded solution and mix it properly.
Keep stirring the solution obtained until it becomes a semi solid mixture.
At last vartis/ wick shapes are rolled from a semisolid mixture and dried in shade.
Now the vartis/ wick shapes are stored in an airtight glass container away from direct sunlight.
Properties Of Jatimukuladi Varti
The properties of Jatimukuladi varti are given as following-

It has antihistamine properties.
Act as antiseptic.
Helps in blood purification.
Has anti allergic effects.
Helps in detoxification.
Act as local analgesic and sedative.
Indications Of Jatimukuladi Varti
The indications of Jatimukuladi varti are described in eye related issues such as given below-

Swelling
Pruritus
Inflammation
Congestion
Wounds
Ulcers
Contraindications
No such contraindications are mentioned.

Dosage / Usage Of Jatimukuladi Varti
Used as anjana (external application) in eyes, rubbed with breast milk or honey.

Taste
Sweet, Refreshing

Smell
Not particular

Conclusion
Above mentioned formulation is described in classics for the issues related to the eyes. Due to the cooling effects of jasmine flower buds it reduces burning, itching and redness like conditions. So for any eye related issues you can administer it and if any severity you may concern the physician.


68. Kalyanaka Ghrita
Reference – Ashtanga Hridayam Uttarasthana
Introduction
Kalyanaka Ghrita is an ayurvedic formulation. This formulation is formulated from the mixture of fruitful herbs with a base of ghee. Kalyanaka Ghrita is known to treat problems related with psychiatric and some other systems.

Ingredients
Ghee – 768 g
Vishala – Citrulus cholocynthis
Elavaluka – Prunus avium
Sariva – Hemidesmus indicus
Bhadra ela – Amomum subulatum
Nata – Valeriana wallichi
Brihati – Solanum indicum
Devadaru – Cedrus deodara
Daruharidra – Berberis aristata
Shalaparni – Desmodium gangeticum
Haridra – Turmeric
Prishnaparni – Uraria picta
Kushta – Saussurea lappa
Manjishta – Rubia cordifolia
Vella – Embelia ribes
Talisapatra – Abbies webbiana
Phalini – Callicarpa macrophylla
Ela – Cardamom
Nagakeshara – Mesua ferrea
Dadimaphalatwak – Punica granatum
Danti – Baliospermum montanum
Padmaka – Prunus poddum
Malati – Jasminum sambac
Utpala – Nymphea stellata
Hima – Santalum album
Triphala up to 12 grams – known to contain following herbs
Haritaki – Terminalia chebula
Bibhitaki – Terminalia bellirica
Amla – Emblica officinalis
Method of Preparation
Took the above given ingredients and collected in a container.

Heated the mixture till the herbal ghee is prepared.

Usage
Up to half teaspoon one to two times a day, with water, before bed and rest according to the doctor’s prescription.

Indications
Psychosis
Epilepsy
Schizophrenia
Lack of memory
Anemia
Cough
Infertility
Fever
Inflammatory conditions
Contraindications
Take precautions if suffered from high BP, cholesterol and heart diseases.
Take under doctor’s prescription.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


69. Ksheer Mandoor
Reference – Bhaishajya-Ratnavali Shoolarogadhikar 631/164
Introduction
Ksheer mandoor is a potent formulation used in the treatment of colicky pain. It is a classical Ayurvedic formulation.

Ingredients
Shuddha Mandoor Churna (Purified Iron oxide) – 375 gm
Gomutra (Cow’s urine) – 1500 ml
Description of Ingredients
Shuddha Mandoor Churna – It is a mineral compound used in various Ayurvedic formulations such as Punarnava Mandoor. This ingredient has an antispasmodic effect and is used in the treatment of abdominal pain. This is also used in kidney and liver disorders.
Gomutra – In Ayurveda cow’s urine is used in the treatment of leprosy, fever, peptic ulcer, kidney disorders, certain allergies, skin diseases etc. It has an analgesic effect also. It helps in the treatment of abdominal pain. This is considered to be a natural source of many minerals which are essential for our body.
Method of Preparation
Take Gomutra and shuddha mandoor churna in an iron pan over low flames.
When gomutra dries off then add Cow’s milk and again heat this formulation over low flames.
When cow’s milk dries off then stir it continuously.
Now when this formulation is looks like a powder then dries off this under the sunlight.
Keep this formulation in a glass container.
Medicinal Properties
Ksheer Mandoor is an Ayurvedic classical medicine. It is beneficial in the treatment of abdominal pain caused due to indigestion, diarrhea, and constipation and vomiting etc. The ingredients are very useful in helping digestive problems. Cow’s urine is very effective against a variety of diseases. It helps in detoxification.

Indications
Parinaamshoola (Colicky pain)
Indigestion
Constipation
Anorexia
Abdominal pain
Dosage
Take 1 teaspoonful twice a day with honey (Madhu).

Cautions
Take it under medical supervision.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


70. Panchatikta Ghrita
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali Kushta adhikara 114-117
Introduction
Panchatikta Ghrita is a classical Ayurvedic preparation in the form of herbal ghee This Ayurvedic medicine having ghee as its base can keep the Vata, Pitta and kapha doshas calm. It can be used in preparatory procedure for Panchakarma as well in medicine form, essentially for skin diseases. Here Panchatikta states five bitter herbs that are chief ingredients in this herbal ghee.

Ingredients and Method of Preparation
Nimba (Neem) – 480 g
Patola (Luffa acutangula) – 480 g
Vyaghri (Solanum xanthocarpum) – 480 g
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) – 480 g
Vasa (Adhatoda vasica) – 480 g
Water for decoction – 12.288 liters boiled and reduced to 3.072 liters
Triphala [Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Vibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica) Amla (Emblica officinalis)] – 128 g each.
Ghrita (Ghee) – 768 ml
Use all above give combination and heat them till herbal ghee is obtained.

Dose
Medicine: 1/4th to 1/2th teaspoon with water, usually before having meal 1-2 times twice daily, or as recommended by Ayurvedic doctor.
Panchakarma preparation: Snehana procedure, the dose depends on the disease status and the judgment of Ayurvedic doctor.
It is usually administered with warm water.

Therapeutic Uses
Herbs used in its formation are helpful in eliminating toxins from body and blood purifying.
This herbal ghee has wide use as medicine as well as in preparatory procedure called Snehakarma.
It can treat non-healing ulcers, skin disease, eczema, worm infestations.
Also treat hemorrhoids and cough.
Contraindications/ Side Effects
Till now no known side effects with this medicine has been reported.
It is advised to avoid its self-medication and consume it under strict medical directions.
People with conditions like diabetes, high cholesterol, heart diseases and high BP must be very cautious.
Its high dose, might leads to diarrhea and indigestion.


71. Phalasarpi (Phala Ghrita)
Reference – Ashtang Hridyam Uttersthan 34/ 64-67
Abstract
Phalasarpi (Phala Ghrita) is a herbal Ayurvedic formulation mentioned in classical texts for managing uterine and ovarian diseases. In this preparation herbs are induced in the medium of ghee along with decoction of herbs, water. It is a very useful uterine tonic during pregnancy as it enhances strength to mother and fetus both. In this article we will discuss Phala ghrita composition, method of preparation, benefits and dosage.

Introduction
Among different preparations in classics, ghrita is used as a base drug having medicinal properties so, Phala ghrita is a medicated preparation for various types of reproductive disorders. This ghrita contains oil soluble and water soluble phyto active principles of natural herbs. It is useful in various gynecological problems such as inflammations, excessive bleeding. It promotes fertility, gives strength to the uterus and prevents abortion. It also acts as a natural immunity booster and safe during pregnancy.

Classical Indication
According to the classics, Phala ghrita is mentioned by Acharya Vaghvat for various types of genital and reproductive disorders. In texts it should be administered in pushya nakshatra (specific time period) for the longer life interval of male or female child with the predominance of vata and pitta dosha. Some of classical indications are given as following-

Yoni dosha (vaginal disorders)
Shukra dosha  (seminal disorders)
Ayu vardhak   (prolonged age)
Pushti vardhak (increase body strength)
Medha / buddhi vardhak (boosts memory)
Graha badha nashak (spiritual beliefs)
Ingredients
The ingredients used for used for preparation of Phala ghrita are given as following-

Manjistha (Rubia cordifolia)
Kustha (Sauserria lappa) 
Tagar (Valeriana wellichi) 
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)
Vibhitaki (Terminalia billerica) 
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis)
Vacha (Acorus calamus) 
Haridra (Curcuma longa)
Daruharidra (Berberis aristata)
Madhuk (Glycyrrhiza glabra) 
Medha (Polygonatum cirrhifolium)
Katu rohini (Picrorhiza kurroa) 
Kakoli (Roscoea procera) 
Ajgandha (Withania somnifera)
Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) 
Hingu (Asafoetida) 
Sharkara (sugar/ jaggery)
Ghrita (cow’s ghee)
Kshir (cow’s milk)
Benefits Of Ingredients
Manjishtha- It is used to treat urinary infections with chronic fever. It is used to treat irregular menstruation. It relieves symptoms of PCOS and promotes smooth blood flow during menstruation.
Kustha- It increases male fertility by maintaining semen morphology. It is good as a uterine stimulant and aphrodisiac qualities. It strengthens the whole reproductive system.
Tagar- It manages sleep, anxiety and restlessness. It relaxes the central nervous system due to sedative and anxiolytic properties. It treats premature ejaculation, erectile dysfunction like conditions.
Haritaki- It is a natural aphrodisiac reducing stress and stimulating hormones to increase libido. It improves male and female fertility and various reproductive issues.
Vibhitaki- It slows down aging and boosts the immune system. It has antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory and anti-fertility properties. It contains essential nutrients and proteins.
Amalaki- It provides nutrients to women, strengthens the uterus and supports reproductive health. It is very beneficial in regular menstruation and improving fertility.
Vacha- It soothes nerves, calms the mind, it balances kapha and vata dosha. It stimulates uterine contractions and reproductive health.
Haridra- It helps in correcting metabolism, it rejuvenates cells, tissues that establish immunity. It balances vata and kapha dosha and acts as antioxidants.
Daruharidra- It is a bitter tonic, antiseptic and antipyretic property. It regulates heavy menstrual bleeding due to its astringent properties.
Madhuk- It flushes harmful toxins from the body and skin related issues. It boosts immunity and prevents various infections.
Medha- It has anti-oxidant and aphrodisiac properties. It promotes uterus health and regulates the menstrual cycle.
Katu rohini- It has cooling properties so it pacifies pitta, kapha dosha among all and removes toxins from the body.
Vidarikand- It maintains healthy reproductive life, improves lipido, fertility in both males and females. It boosts strength and stamina of males.
Kakoli- It helps in preventing age related problems, general debility, impotency, burning sensation and inflammation.
Ajgandha- It is the best herb for stress and infertility. It improves blood circulation and improves sperm quantity, quality.
Shatavari- It boosts overall vitality, nourishes ovaries, promotes production of reproductive hormones and increases libido in females.
Hingu- It stimulates hormonal activities, increases energy level and improves blood circulation. It helps to relieve menstrual pain and infertility.
Cow’s milk– It is rich in various nutrients and minerals which helps in boosting immunity and promotes reproductive health.
Method Of Preparation
The steps for preparation of phala ghrita are given as following-

Firstly collect all the drugs mentioned above and wash them properly. 
Then make kalka (paste) from kalka dravyas in a clean vessel.
Mix the kalka prepared with cow’s milk and then prepare decoction from drava dravyas.
Stir the solution properly and cook it on a mild heath.
Then mix the solution properly and reduce it to the quantity of ghrita.
Now the ghrita is prepared and filtered out in a vessel.
Store the obtained ghrit in an airtight glass container and keep away from direct sunlight.
Properties
The properties of phala ghrita are given as following-

It strengthens reproductive organs.
Prevents abortions.
Promotes male and female fertility (aphrodisiac property)
Maintains healthy pregnancy.
Act as an endocrine stimulant. 
Corrects vata and pitta related disorders.
Indications
The various indications of phala ghrita are as following-

Genital disorders
Sexual disorders
Secondary amenorrhoea
Oligospermia
Improves reproductive capacity
Premature ejaculation
Erectile dysfunction
Uterine diseases 
Ovarian diseases
Contraindications
Some of conditions when Phala ghrita is avoided are as follows-

Diarrhea 
Indigestion 
Dyslipidemia
Hypertension
Dosage / Usage
10-20 ml twice a day before a meal.

Anupana
With milk or sharkara (sugar)

Taste
Madhur (Sweet), Kshaya (Astringent) and Tikhta (Bitter).

Smell
Like Ghee

Conclusion
Above mentioned, Phalasarpis is a ghrita formulation which is very effective in reproductive health especially in infertility. It promotes natural conception and healthy pregnancy as we know these days due to our lifestyle it is of great concern. So, one can use Phala ghrita for such conditions and if any severity you may concern the physician.


72. Shatavari Guda
Reference: Sahasrayoga Lehaprakarana 7
Introduction
Shatavari Guda is a poly herbal medicine effective in diseases caused due to vitiation of Vata dosha and Pitta doshas. It is a well-known Ayurvedic medicine available in herbal jam / paste form. It has extensive use in treating gynecological conditions, problems of urinary tract and liver complications. This medicine is prepared in jaggery base.

Ingredients
Jaggery – 3.072 kg
Juice extract of Shatavari – (Asparagus racemosus) – 3.072 liters
Ghee – 768 g
Sugar – 192 g.
Cardamom
Mushali (Chlorophytum borivilianum)
Gokshura (Tribulus)
Black and white varieties of Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus)
Vidari (Pueraria tuberosa)
Long pepper
Shilajit
Vanshalochana (Bambusa bambos)
Method of Preparation
It is prepared by heating Shatavari juice extract with added jaggery, sugar and ghee to it. Heating is allowed till it attains semisolid form.

Then it is further added with 12 grams of each of Cardamom, Mushali, Gokshura, Black and white varieties of Sariva, , Vidari, Long pepper, Shilajit, Vanshalochana – 192 g.

Dosage
Consume 5-10 grams 1-2 times a day after having meals or as suggested by Ayurvedic doctor with milk or water.

Dose for children below 5 years – 1-2 grams, 1-2 times a day, along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Dose for children between 5 – 12 years – 5 grams 1-2 times a day along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Therapeutic Uses
Shatavari Guda is a common Ayurvedic medicine that has a use in nearly all the gynecological problems.
It is useful Ayurvedic medicine for PCOS,
Beneficial Ayurvedic medicine to counter the problems of menstrual pain, irregular menstrual cycles, heavy menstrual bleeding.
Also an efficient treatment to control dysuria, urinary tract infections, bleeding disorders, liver complications, jaundice, gonorrhea, raktapitta, giddiness and burning sensation in stomach.
It is helpful to restore energy of injured and thin people.
Contraindications/ Side Effects
It is a safe Ayurvedic medicine and till now no such side effects with this medicine has been reported.


73. Sukumara Ghrita
Reference – Sahasrayogam Ghrita Yoga Prakaranam 19/ 148, Ashtanga Hridyam Chikitsa (Vidradhi Vyadhi) 13/ 41-47
Abstract
Sukumara Ghrita formulations mentioned in classics can be used internally for shaman and shodhan (elevating, purification) or externally for abhyanga (massage) like procedures. So, different media were there in ancient times to extract active principles of herbs like ghee, oil, water, etc. So the Sukumara ghrita is mentioned in a variety of disorders like abscess, hernia, ascites, any tumor growth, etc. In this article we will discuss Sukumara ghrita composition, method of preparation, benefits and dosage.

Introduction
Sukumara ghrita is a medicated ghrita formulation in which cow’s ghee is used as a base drug. It is basically used to manage growths and herniations in abdomen, pelvis, etc. It contains essential nutrients for abdominal health and reproductive system. This preparation is also known as Sukumara yamaka which means it contains a combination of two i.e. eranda taila and go ghrita. This formulation can be administered in any season with no known side effect under medical supervision.

Classical Indication
According to classical texts, Sukumara ghrita is mentioned in Sahasrayogam and among all three dosha it acts on vitiated vata and pitta dosha. There are some classical properties such as increased strength, rejuvenating, and boosts immunity. The classical indications of Sukumara ghrita are as given below-

Vridhi (Hernia)
Vidradhi (abscess)
Gulma (Tumorous growth) 
Arsas (Piles)
Yonishula (Vgainal pain)
Vata vyadhi (Vataj disorders)
Shopha (Swelling)
Udar roga (Abdominal disorders)
Vata rats (gout)
Pliha vridhi (splenomegaly)
Vidvibandha (constipation)
Ingredients
The list of ingredients of Sukumara ghrita are given as follows-

Kwatha Dravyas
Punarnava mool (Boerhaavia diffusa) 
Dashmoola 
Ksheer vidari (Rosacea purpurea) 
Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera)
Eranda (Ricinus communis) 
Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) 
Darbha (Erianthus arundinaceum) 
Nala (Desmostachya bipinnata)  
Sara (Saccharum arundinaceum)
Kasa (Saccharum spontaneum) 
Ikshu mula (Saccharum officinarum) 
Potgala (Typha elephantina)
Drava Dravya
Gokshira (Cow’s milk)
Sneha Dravyas
Go ghrita  (Cow’s ghee)
Eranda taila (Castor oil)
Kalka Dravyas
Pippali (Piper longum fruit) 
Pippali mool (Piper longum root) 
Saindhav lavana (rock salt)
Yastimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra) 
Draksha (Vitis vinifera) 
Yavani (Trachyspermum ammi) 
Sunil (Zingiber officinalis) 
Guda (jaggery)
Benefits Of Ingredients
Punarnava mool- It reduces edema, inflammation, swelling of the tissues. It is used as diuretics for kidney disorders and reduces spleen enlargement, it also aids in digestion.
Dashmoola- It contains ten numbers of drugs which primarily work on vitiated vata dosha and act as analgesics. It is used to manage pain, stress and helps in digestive disorders.
Ksheer vidari- It provides soothing to the urinary tract and reduces inflammation. It helps in improving kidney functioning and healing wounds. It improves the reproductive system of both males, females.
Ashwagandha- It reduces inflammation, stress, anxiety, increases muscle strength and boosts overall body metabolism. It increases fertility and provides physical, mental relief.
Eranda- It is very beneficial in balancing vata dosha, reduces any type of abdominal tumors and strengthens the urinary system. It helps in wound healing and hydration.
Shatavari- It acts as an antioxidant and boosts the immune system. It helps in balancing hormones and reduces inflammation in the body. It improves female reproductive health.
Darbha- It is useful for abdominal disorders and is cooler in potency. It helps to protect against radiations, inflammations in any part of the body.
Nala- It helps in managing loss of appetite, hyperacidity, constipation and anorexia. It helps in treating ulcers and urinary tract inflammations.
Sara- It helps in enhancing immunity, treating stomach ulcers and managing body fatigue, tiredness. It reduces any growth and prevents microorganisms.
Kasa- It helps to manage menorrhagia, bleeding piles, painful urination and renal calculi like conditions. It is very useful in providing nutrition and purifying blood.
Ikshu mula- It is refreshing, nutritious and rich in vitamins and carbohydrates. It balances the pH level of the stomach and facilitates secretion of digestive juices.
Potgala- It manages urine retention, dysuria and renal calculus. It reduces burning sensations, healing wounds and bleeding disorders.
Gokshira- It contains nutrients important for bone health. It is a rich source of calcium, vitamin D, phosphorus and magnesium. It boosts immunity and corrects metabolism.
Go ghrita- It helps in cellular functioning and growth of cells due to presence of various vitamins. It nourishes skin and protects from damage. It improves digestion and immunity.
Castor oil- It is a powerful laxative and natural moisturizer. It helps in wound healing, digestion and prevents microbes.
Pippali phala- It is very beneficial in respiratory disorders, aids in weight loss and reduces menstrual cramps. It promotes relaxation of body tissues and calms nerves.
Pippali mool- It relieves inflammation, edema and restores normal structure of the body. It improves appetite and relieves flatulence. It improves liver functioning.
Saindhav lavana- It provides trace minerals and reduces risk of low sodium levels. It improves muscle cramps and digestive issues.
Yashtimadhu- It works as a rasayana i.e. rejuvenator and manages chronic acidity, ulcers and bronchial conditions. It helps to improve digestive functioning and wound healing.
Draksha- It reduces weakness, fatigue and improves vitality of the human body. It reduces stress level and manages chronic bleeding disorders.
Yavani- It promotes digestive fire and prevents anorexia, indigestion, acidity. It has spasmodic, anti-inflammatory and laxative properties.
Sunshine- It is used as an anti-oxidant and prevents bacterial infections. It reduces pain, inflammation or any growth like structure.
Guda- It flushes out toxins and balances pitta dosha. It promotes digestion, cleanses the GI tract and supports the urinary system.
Method Of Preparation
The steps for preparation of Sukumara ghrita are given as following-

Firstly collect all the drugs mentioned above and wash them properly.
Then make a fine powder of all the drugs after drying them away from sunlight.
Make kalka (paste) from kalka dravyas in a clean stainless steel vessel.
Then add cow ghee to the kalka (paste) and mix it properly.
Prepare the decoction of the drava dravya by reducing water to one fourth of quantity.
Add decoction to the kalka-ghee mixture, keep continuously stirring.
Cook the solution obtained under low heat till it remains a quantity of ghee.
At last filter the solution properly and the ghrita obtained should be stored in airtight glass container.
Properties
The properties of Sukumara ghrita are given as following-

It has an anti ulcerogenic property.
It has an antitumor and anticancer effect. 
It corrects digestive system disorders.
Beneficial for reproductive health and improves menstrual flow.
Provides nutrition and strength. 
Helps in pacifying vata and pitta dosha.
Indications
The indications of Sukumara ghrita are given as following-

Hernia
Phthisis
Hyperacidity
Constipation
Urogenital disorders
Menstrual disorders (dysmenorrhea, PCOS)
Vaginal diseases
Infertility
Haemorrhoids
Hydrocele
Contraindications
There are no such conditions when Sukumara ghrita is not given.
Hypertensive, diabetic patients must take physician guidance.
Dosage / Usage
10-20 ml twice daily with food.

Anupana
With lukewarm water, milk.

Taste
Madhura (Sweet), Tikhta (Bitter), Kashya (Astringent).

Smell
Like Ghee

Conclusion
Ayurveda aims to manage by eliminating its root cause of disease and Sukumara ghrita is also such a potent formulation. It is very beneficial in any growths, reproductive disorders, abscess, etc. It improves overall health, immunity, strength and metabolism of the body. So, one can use this formulation for the indications discussed, if any concern you should consult to the physician.


74. Tiktaka Ghritam – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: The Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Volume – I
Introduction
Tiktaka Ghritam is an Ayurvedic formulation. It is used to cure skin diseases primarily. It is also known as Tiktaka Ghrita.

Ingredients
Patol (Trichosanthes dioica)
Nimba (Neem)
Katuka (Picrorrhiza kurroa)
Darvi (Berberis aristata)
Duralabha (Alhagi pseudalhagi)
Parpata (Fumaria indica)
Trayamana (Gentiana kurroo)
Water for decoction – 6.144 liters boiled and reduced to 768 ml
Trayanti (Gentiana kurroo)
Musta (Cyperus rotundus)
Bhunimba (Andrographis paniculata)
Kalinga (Holarrhena antidysenterica)
Long pepper (Piper longum)
Ghrita (Clarified butter)
Method of Preparation
These herbs are combined and added to the clarified butter and heated till all the herbs are infused thoroughly and it becomes herbal.

Dosage
12 grams with lukewarm water before meals.

Indications
Skin disorders
Leprosy
Carbuncles
Itching
Anemia
Vomiting
Wound with us
Sinus
Abscess
Inflammation
Psychosis
Piles
Leucorrhea
Eye disorders
Jaundice.
Contraindications
There are no reported side effects with this medicine.
Self-medication should be avoided.
Over dosage might lead to diarrhea.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


75. Triphala Ghrita – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali Netraroga adhikara 181-186, Ashtanga Hridayam.
Introduction
Triphala Ghrita is an Ayurvedic medicine, in herbal ghee form. This medicine has ghee as its base. Triphala is the main ingredient in this medicine. Which refers to group of three fruits – Haritaki, Vibhitaki and Amla. This medicine is mainly used to treat the eye diseases. It Calms Pitta and Vata pitta doshas.

Ingredients
12 grams of each of:-
Triphala – Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Vibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica) Amla (Emblica officinalis)
Trikatu – Pepper, long pepper and ginger.
Draksha – dry grapes
Madhuka – Licroice – Glycyrrhiza glabra
Katukarohini – Picrorrhiza kurroa
Prapaundarika – Lotus variety
Ela – cardamom
Vidanga – Embelia ribes
Nagakeshar – Mesua ferrea
Nilotpala – Nymphoea stellata
Shweta and Krishna Sariva – Hemidesmus indicus
Chandana – sandalwood – Santalum album
Haridra – Turmeric – Curcuma longa
Daruharidra – Berberis aristata
Ghee – 576 g
Milk – 768 ml
Triphala Kashayam – 2.304 liters.
Method of Preparation
The above combination is heated till herbal ghee is prepared.

Dosage
Take the quarter to half teaspoon with water, usually before food, once or twice a day, or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Indications
Early stage of cataract
Erysipelas
Excessive discharge in women
Eye pain with itching and discharge,
Tumors
Cough
Edema
Hair fall
Intermittent fever
Pterygium
Eye and eye lid related diseases.
Constipation
IBS – C
Low digestion strength
Side Effects
There are no known side effects with this medicine. However it is best to use this product under medical supervision.
Self-medication with this medicine is discouraged.
High dosage may cause diarrhea and indigestion.
People with diabetes, high cholesterol, heart diseases and high BP should exercise precaution.


76. Ajmodadi Kasaya – Ingredients, Indications, Benefits and Uses
Introduction
Ajmodadi kasaya is a formulation in a kasaya form used for internal administration and used in the treatment of fever and some digestive system related issues.

Ingredients and Quantity
Ajamoda (Carum roxburghianum) – 1 part
Katukarohini (Picrorhiza kurroa) – 1 part
Water – 16 times to all
Method of Preparation
Prepare the coarse powder of all the ingredients and add water to it. Then it should be reduced to one eighth by boiling. On completion of the process, it should be filtered through a clean cloth and used in Luke warm state.

Therapeutic Uses of Ajmodadi Kasaya
Ajmoda is an Indian spice which is very commonly used in Indian households and has excellent benefits in Digestive health.
This is very beneficial in conditions related to Vata and kapha dosha inflicted illnesses.
Ajamodadi kasaya is highly beneficial in the treatment of Fever where the raise of temperature is seen at interval of every 2 days.
This is very helpful in fevers arising out of Vatha and kapha dosha where there is myalgia, arthralgia, suppressed hunger and heaviness is mainly seen.
It is very beneficial in abdominal pain, bladder pain and colic.
Ajamodadi kasaya taken in any conditions of abdominal colic, gaseous distension and helps improving digestion.
It helps to better the conditions of Anaha and Adhmana.
This kasaya helps in the issue of Arochaka (Anorexia) where a person cannot elicit the taste and has developed aversion to food.
Ajamodadi kasaya is good for the cardiac health.
People with diabetes can start taking this kasaya which helps in maintaining their bodily sugar levels and alongside managing digestive health.
Dose: 40 ml. B.D. (Twice a day) lukewarm condition.

Indications
Chaturthika jvara, Adhmana, Anaha, Aruci, Udarashula, Jvara and Ajeerna.

Side Effects
No known side effects, better to take under medical supervision.


77. Avipattikar Churna – Avipattikar Churna Uses, Benefits and Ingredients
Reference – Rasatantra Sara (first part); edition 13; 667-668.
Introduction
Avipattikar Churna is an herbal formulation that consists of various herbs mixture. This is known for its carminative and purgative properties. As the name suggests “Avipatti” mean to get rid from troubles. This is traditionally used to remove excess pitta dosha from the body.

Avipattikar Churna Ingredients
Baheda (Terminalia bellirica)
Dry ginger powder (Zingiber officinale)
Black pepper (Piper nigrum)
Peepal (Ficus religiosa)
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)
Amla (Emblica officinalis)
Nagarmotha (Cyperus rotundus)
Vidanga (Embelia ribes)
Tejpatta (Laurus nobilis)
Clove (Syzygium aromaticum)
Green cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum)
Nisoth (Operculina turpethum)
Mishri (Sugar cubes)
Method of Preparation Avipattikar Churna
Take herbs Dry ginger powder (Zingiber officinale), Peepal (Ficus religiosa), Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Amla (Emblica officinalis), Nagarmotha (Cyperus rotundus), Green cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum), Tejpatta (Laurus nobilis), Baheda (Terminalia bellirica), Black pepper (Piper nigrum) & Vidanga (Embelia ribes) up to 12 grams.
Take another herbs also, Clove (Syzygium aromaticum) up to 120 grams, mishri 160 grams and Nisoth (Operculina turpethum) 140 grams.
Now mix all the herbs and crush to make its churna form.
Medicinal Properties of Avipattikar Churna
It is an Ayurvedic classical herbal powder used for various problems like hyperacidity, gastritis, burning feeling due to excess acid, loss of appetite and indigestion linked with gastritis, piles, urinary problems, difficulty in micturition and kidney stones. The herbs show anti-inflammatory, antacid, carminative, antilithiatic, antioxidant, appetizer, carminative, digestive stimulant and diuretic properties. This churna expels out the acid from the stomach to the intestine, which helps to reduce the inflammation and rejuvenate mucus lined barrier. It neutralizes the acid secretion in the stomach. Avipattikar Churna helps to improve overall digestion and improve loss of appetite. This is considered as very good remedy for gastritis, gastro esophageal reflux disease (GERD) and helps to get relief from symptoms like severe heartburn, burning in the throat, dysphagia, chest pain, hoarseness, sour taste, etc. Use of this churna helps to improve kidneys functions, beneficial in kidney stones, nephritis & nephrotic syndrome. It provides effective result in constipation, painful & difficult urination.

Avipattikar Churna Indications
Constipation
Heartburn
Acidity
Indigestion
Chronic gastritis
Kidney stones
Nephrotic syndrome
Urinary problems
Uremia
Dysuria
Dose
Take 4 to 6 grams with plain water, twice daily before meals.

Contraindications
Pregnancy
Breast-feeding
Acute gastritis and inflammation
Abdominal pain
Abdominal cramps
Diabetes
Epigastric tenderness
Diarrhoea
Dysentery
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


78. Balaguluchyadi Thailam
Reference:- Sahasrayoga – Tailayoga Prakarana – 14
Abstract
Balaguluchyadi Thailam is an ayurvedic oil formulated to alleviate the discomfort associated with conditions such as arthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.

When applied externally to affected areas, it offers relief from pain, swelling, and burning sensations. This wonderful formulation of herbs works together to give you a soothing feeling and mainly acts on vata and pitta dosha.

Benefits
Relieves from joint pains
Effective for rheumatoid arthritis
Acts on swelling, burning sensation
Helpful gout, frozen shoulder
Ingredients Of Balaguluchyadi Thailam
Bala (Sida cordifolia) – 256 grams
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) – 256 grams
Surapadapa (Cedrus deodara) – 256 grams
Water for decoction
Jata (Nardostachys jatamansi) – 16 grams
Amaya (Saussurea lappa) – 16 grams
Chandana (Pterocarpus santalinus) – (Red Sandalwood) – 16 grams
Kunduru (Boswellia serrata) – 16 grams
Nata (Valeriana wallichi) – 16 grams
Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) – 16 grams
Sarala (Pinus roxburghi) – 16 grams
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata) – 16 grams
Taila (Oil of Sesamum indicum) – 768 ml
How To Use
Quantity sufficient based on the area of application.
Moordhataila (application to head) and Abhyanga (body massage).


79. Bilwadi Lehyam
Reference: Sahasrayogam – Leha prakarana – 1.
Introduction
Bilwadi Lehyam is an Ayurvedic medicine also known by other names like Bilwadi Leha, Bilwadi Lehyam, Bilvadi Leham, Vilvadi leham etc. It is used to treat the variety of stomach related complaints like vomiting, nausea, low digestion power etc.

Ingredients and How to Prepare?
Bilwa – Aegle marmelos – 1.536 kg is added with 12.288 liters of water, boiled and reduced to 3.072 liters, filtered. To this Kashayam (decoction) 768 grams of one year old jaggery is added and heated to semi solid consistency.

It is added with 12 g of each of the following:-
Musta (Cyperus rotundus), Coriander, Cumin, Caraway, Cardamom, Cinnamon, Nagakeshar (Mesua ferrea), Trikatu – Pepper, Long Pepper and Ginger.

Dosage
Take 5 – 10 g two times in a day.

This medicine is prescribed to be taken in small quantities or in repeated dosage of around 2 gms, multiple times a day.

Dosage for children below 5 years of age – 1 – 2 grams, once or twice a day, along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Dosage for children between 5 – 12 years of age – 5 grams once or twice a day along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Indications
Nausea
Vomiting
Low digestion power
Anorexia
Asthma
Contraindications
To be taken under medical supervision.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



80. Dadimashtaka Churna – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali
Introduction
Dadimashtaka churna is a herbal formulation that is prepared from mixture of herbs. The main herb of this mixture is pomegranate. This fruit is enriched with lots of health benefits. This churna is known to treat problems of digestive systems.

Ingredients
Rock Sugar – 40 gm
Pomegranate (Punica granatum) – 320 gm
Cinnamon (Cinnamomum zeylanicum) – 20 gm
Yavani (Trachyspermum ammi) – 40gm
Coriander (Coriandrum sativum) – 40 gm
Triaktu (mixture of pepper (Piper nigrum), Long pepper (Piper longum) and Ginger (Zingiber officinale)) – 120gm
Vanshalochan (Bambusa bambos) – 10 gm
Long pepper root (Piper longum) – 40 gm
Nagakesara (Mesua ferrea) – 20 gm
White cumin seed (Cuminum cyminum) – 40 gm
Patra (Cinnamomum tamala) – 20gm
Cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum) – 20gm
Method of preparation
Take all the ingredients with its appropriate quantity and powder them separately.

Took Cinnamon, Patra, and Nagakesara up to 20 grams. Took Yavani, Coriander, Long pepper root, White cumin, Triaktu and Pomegranate up to 40 grams. Vanshalochan up to 10 grams and sugar up to 80 grams.

Took all the powdered form of herbs and mixed well to form Dadimashtaka churna.

Dose
For adults – 6 to 10 grams one or two times a day.

For small children and infants – one to two grams one or two times a day, after meals with water.

Indications
Malabsorption
Promotes digestion
IBS
Diarrhea
Cough
Contraindications
Avoid if you suffer from diabetes.

Avoid over dose, can worsen gastritis problem.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


81. Ekadashayas Rasa
Reference – Bhaishajya-Ratnavali Vridhirogadhikar 796/82-84
Introduction
Ekadashayas rasa is a herbo-mineral composition. This formulation is used for the treatment of various growths in the body.

Ingredients
Maricha churna
Pippali churna
Haritaki churna
Shuddha Parada
Shuddha Gandhak
Abhrak Bhasma
Shuddha hingula
Amalaki churna
Bibhitaki churna
Chitrak
Tamra bhasma
Kasis bhasma
Pushpa rag bhasma
Shuddha shilajit
Ajwain churna
Jeera churna
Vacha churna
Chavya churna
Madan phal churna
Quantity of Ingredients
All drugs in equal quantity.

Description of Main Ingredients
Maricha Churna – The latin name of marich is Piper nigrum. It has numerous health benefits due to its digestive property. It removes all the toxins from the body and is also known as an antidote for insect bites. This also enhances the appetite.
Pippali Churna – Pippali is also known as Piper longum. It has antibacterial, antispasmodic, anti-inflammatory, anthelmintic properties, thus aids in relieving the numerous symptoms. It mainly pacifies vata and kapha dosha. It is very beneficial in gastric issues, pain in stomach and enhancing digestive fire.
Haritaki Churna – Haritaki is also known as Terminalia chebula.It has a property that pacifies the tridosha. It has astringent, purgative, rejuvenative, laxative and anthelmintic properties. It aids in promoting the digestion of food and builds strength.  
Shuddha Parade – Parada is known as mercury. Its purified form is used as medicine. It holds numerous health benefits which are already mentioned in our ancient texts. It mainly balances the tridosha. 
Shuddha Gandhak – It is also known as purified Sulphur. It is a wonderful digestive stimulant which corrects the balance of agni (fire). It provides relief from inflammation. It also pacifies the vitiated dosha and is very useful in vata related disorders.
Abhrak Bhasma – Abhrak bhasma is used in Ayurveda for abdominal, liver, respiratory disorders. It has anti-inflammatory and digestive properties.
Shuddha Hingula – Botanically it is known as red sulphide of mercury. This pacifies vata and kapha dosha and hence effective in inflammatory conditions.
Amalaki Churna (Powder of Emblica officinalis) – It improves digestion. It is effective in indigestion, constipation etc. It pacifies all three dosha (Vata,Pitta and kapha).
Bibhitaki Churna (Powder of Terminalia bellerica) – It has laxative, purgative properties. It promotes the intellectual power and aids in relieving the associated symptoms of the disease.
Chitrak – Also known as Plumbago zeylanica. It balances vata and kapha dosha. It is mentioned in deepniye (appetite and digestive stimulant), shoola prasahaman (pain relieving herbs) etc. thus it is a very good digestive stimulant.
Tamra Bhasma – Tamra bhasma is very effective in treating the patients with acidity, expectoration, and hematological disorders. It also improves the peristaltic movements of the alimentary canal.  
Kasis Bhasma – It is very effective in liver and spleen disorders, anemia, and weakness. It helps in detoxifying the body and balances the tridosha.
Shuddha Shilajit – Shilajit is a wonderful antioxidant, diuretic, anti-inflammatory and immune modulator. It also maintains the water electrolyte balance in the body.  
Ajwain (Trachyspermum ammi) – It pacifies pitta dosha and assists in treating digestive health issues.
Method of Preparation
Make a kajjali from Parada and Gandhak.
Then add rest of the ingredients in this kajjali and give proper frolement.
Give bhavna with the decoction of shunthi (Zingiber officinale).
Make 250 mg tablet and let them dry.
Kept these tablets in a glass container.
Medicinal Properties
This formulation is used for the unwanted growths in the body. They pacify all three dosha. This herbal product is best for the treatment of hernia such as inguinal hernia, umbilical hernia, femoral hernia etc. the ingredients in this formulation provides strength to the abdominal muscles.

Indications
Inguinal hernia
Umbilical hernia
Femoral hernia
Incisional Hernia
Hydrocele
Dosage
1 tablet twice a day with honey.

Cautions
Take under medical supervision.


82. Eladi Churna
Reference: Sahasrayogam
Introduction
Eladi churna is a powdered herbal formulation and its main ingredient is Cardamom. Eladi churna helps in treating digestive disorders, nausea, anorexia, excessive thirst. It aids in balancing Vata and Kapha.

Ingredients
Cardamom
Cinnamon
Nagkesar
Black pepper
Dried ginger
Sugar
Method of Preparation
First clean all the ingredients and then grind them separately. Mix and sift these powders with a muslin cloth to obtain fine powder. Store this powder in an airtight container away from heat and light.

Dosage
1 to 3 grams with honey or sugar.

Indications
Loss of appetite
Vomiting
Nausea
Enhances digestive power
Respiratory disorders
Expectorant
Contraindications
If you’re already suffering from gastritis or any other digestive disorder you might feel burning sensation in your stomach.
It is better to be avoided by pregnant women and children.
Over dosage should be avoided and it should be taken under medical supervision.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


83. Hingwashtak Churna – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Rasatantra Sar (first part); edition 13; 662.
Introduction
Hingvashtak Churna is an ayurvedic formulation which is the combination of several significant ingredients. As the name suggest hing (asafetida) is the major ingredient of this formulation. Hing is known as old Indian culinary ingredient which is enriched with various healthy properties. This formulation is known to treat the problems of digestion.

Ingredients
S. No.	Herb Used	Latin Name
1	Shunthi	Zingiber officinale
2	Pippali	Piper longum
3	Marich	Piper nigrum
4	Ajmoda	Apium graveolens
5	Saindhav lavan (Rock salt)	
6	Jeera Shwet	Cuminum cyminum
7	Jeera Syah	Carum carvi
8	Shudh Hing	Ferula asafetida
Method of preparation
Took all the herbs in equal quantities and mix them.
Now grind them to make it in powder form.
Churna is ready to use.
Dose
2 to 4 grams with ghee (clarified butter) during food.

Indications
Indigestion
Weak digestive power
Joint disorders like rheumatoid arthritis
Anorexia
Bloating
Contraindications
Stomach irritation.
Under medical prescription if suffered from high blood pressure or kidney problems.


84. Lavangadi Churna
Reference – Rasatantra Sara (first part); edition 13; 649 – 669.
Introduction
Lavan Bhaskar Churna is an ayurvedic preparation which is prepared from mixture of significant herbs and salts. This churna is used to treat digestive problems.

Ingredients
Common Salt (Namak)
Rock Salt (Sendha Namak)
Black Salt (Kala Namak)
Coriander (Coriandrum sativum)
Kach lavana
Peepal (Ficus religiosa)
Black cumin (Nigella sativa)
Black pepper (Piper Nigrum)
Zeera/cumin (Cuminum cyminum)
Sonth (Dry Ginger powder)
Anardana (Punica granatum)
Piplamool (Piper longum)
Tejpatta (Laurus nobilis)
Nagarkesar (Mesua ferrea)
Talis patra (Abies webbiana)
Amalvet (Rumex acetosa)
Ilaichi (Elettaria cardamomum)
Daalacinii (Cinnamomum verum)
Method of preparation
Took 96 grams common salt, 60 grams black salt, 24 grams rock salt, kach lavana, black cumin, pipplamool, peepal, coriander, nagarkesar, tejpatta, talis patra and amalvet, dry ginger powder, cumin and black pepper up to 12 grams, anardana up to 48 grams, ilaichi and daalacinii up to 6 grams.
Mixed all the ingredients in proper proportions and crushed to make its powder or can say churna.
Dose
2 to 3 grams two times a day with buttermilk or simple water.

Indications
Gas problem
Piles
Constipation
Bloating
Cough
Cold
Indigestion
Respiratory problems
Stomach pain
Spleen diseases
Fistula
Contraindications
Avoid over dose that can cause burning sensations and stomach irritation.
Avoid or take under medical prescription, if one is suffered from any kidney disease and hyperacidity.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


85. Nishamalaki – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Introduction on Nishamalaki
Nishamalaki is a unique ayurvedic formulation available in form of Churna (powder) and Vati (Tablets). It is useful in the treatment of different disease like diabetes, nephropathy, and infections. This formulation is combination of two natural ingredients – Amla (Indian Gooseberry) and Haldi (Turmeric). These are well known for anti-hyperglycemic properties and used in the management of diabetes mellitus in ayurvedic and traditional herbal medicines. In diabetes mellitus, it prevents frequent infections, protects eyes from diabetic retinopathy, and precludes the occurrence of cardiovascular disorders and nephropathy.

Nishamalaki is beneficial in various types of urinary disorders & reduces frequent urination in diabetic patients. This formulation is useful in Albuminuria. Presence of Amla shows anti-oxidant and rejuvenating properties. It maintains glucose metabolism, boost up immunity & reduces stress. Amla herb shows similar properties as of anti-diabetic drug (Glibenclamide), that stimulate pancreas to increase secretion of insulin. Gallotannin, Ellagic acid, Gallic acid, and corilagin shows anti-diabetic properties in Alma herb. It helps to prevent diabetic complications also. Turmeric in this formulation improves insulin production & beta cells function of pancreas in diabetic patients. It possesses anti-diabetic & anti-hyperglycemic properties.

Ingredients of Nishamalaki
Amla – Emblica officinalis
Turmeric – Curcuma longa
How to make Nishamalaki Churna?
Make fine powder of these two ingredients separately in equal quantity and mix uniformly to get the powder.

Nishamalaki can be used in churna, tablets and decoction form.

How to make Nishamalaki Decoction?
Take 10 gm of Nishamalaki powder and 240 ml of water. Boil this powder until it remains 60 ml. Now this decoction is ready.

Dosage
2-3 grams once or two times a day before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Nishamalaki Churna dosage: 1) For children: 1.5 gm 2) For adults: 3 gm 3) For old age: 3 gm
Nishamalaki Tablets dosage: 1) For children:  2 tablets 2) For adults: 4 tablets 3) For old age: 4 tablets
Nishamalaki Decoction dosage: 1) For children: 30 ml 2) For adults: 60 ml 3) For old age: 60 ml
Medicinal Properties of Nishamalaki
Nishamalaki shows various properties mentioned below:-
Anti-diabetic
Anti-hyperglycemic
Antioxidant
Immunomodulator
Anti-inflammatory
Anti-allergic
Antilipemic
Antipruritics
Cardioprotective
Indications of Nishamalaki
Nishamalaki is therapeutically indicated in following diseases:-
Diabetes Mellitus Type-2
Albuminuria
Frequent Urination
Slow healing sores
Urticaria
Skin Allergies
Atherosclerosis
Health Benefits of Nishamalaki
In Cardiovascular diseases: It gives effective results in Chest pain, stroke, Coronary artery disease and atherosclerosis.
Diabetic neuropathy: Nishamalaki herbal formulation is very effective in problems like numbness, burning sensation & tingling sensation felt by diabetic patients.
Diabetic Retinopathy: This formulation gives effective results in diabetic retinopathy as it prevents eye damage & improve vision.
Skin infection: The herbal formulation is very good for skin infections.
Diabetic Nephropathy: Kidney damage is very common in diabetic patients. To prevent damage use Nishamalaki herbal formulation.
Side Effects
Nishamalaki contains safest ingredients. No side effects are there. This churna is safe for long term use also.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



86. Pushyanug Churna
Reference: Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana, 30/90-96, Bhaisajyaratnavali, strirogadhikara: 46-49
Introduction
Pushyanug Churna is an eminent Ayurvedic medicine, in form of herbal powder that can soothe Vata, Pitta and Kapha. Pushyanug Churna is astringent, pungent, sweet and bitter in taste. It acts on plasma, blood, muscles and reproductive system. This churna is very useful in Ayurvedic treatment for bleeding disorders.

Ingredients
10 g of each Ingredients:-
Patha (Cyclea peltata)
Jambu-bija majja (Eugenia jambolana)
Amra- bija majja (Mango seed)
Pasanabheda (Aerua lanata)
Rasanjana (Berberis aristata)
Ambasthaki (Cissampelos pareira)
Mocharasa (Salmalia malabarica)
Samanga (lajjalu) (Mimosa pudica)
Padma kesara (Kamala) (Nelumbo nucifera)
Kumkuma (Crocus sativus)
Ativisa (Aconitum heterophyllum)
Musta (Cyperus rotundus)
Bilva (Aegle marmelos)
Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa)
Gairika (Red Ochre)
Katphala (Myrica nagi)
Maricha (Black pepper) (Piper nigrum)
Shunti (Ginger) (Zingiber officinalis)
Raisins (Vitis vinifera)
Rakta chandana (Pterocarpus santalinus)
Katvanga (Oroxylum indicum)
Kutaja (Holarrhena antidysenterica)
Shwetasariva (Hemidesmus indicus)
Dhataki (Woodfordia fruticosa)
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna)
Method of Preparation
To prepare this medicine, all herbs are ground to make fine powder and homogenous mixture is prepared.

Dosage
Consume 1-3 grams along with honey and rice water, 1-2 times a day before or after meals or as suggested by doctor.

Therapeutic Uses
Ayurvedic treatment used in menorrhagia, metrorrhagia, leucorrhoea & menstrual disorder etc.
Excessive menstrual bleeding due to various reasons.
Used in treatment of uterine infections and haemorrhoids.
Good effects in diarrhea & dysentery.
Contraindications/ Side Effects
Over usage of this medicine for a long time may result in irregular menstruations.
Best to have the medicine during the period of excessive discharge and during menorrhagia.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



87. Panchajeeraka Gudam
Reference – Sahasrayogam Guda Yoga Prakaranam 15/ 7
Abstract
Panchjeerak gudam is a semi solid jam like formulation, as its name suggests it contains jaggery as binding agent. The cow’s ghee is used as a base drug infused with many herbal medicines which helps in detoxifying the uterus and prevents collection of ama (toxins) in the body. It is beneficial in various gynaecological disorders, promotes strength, prevents viral infections, dyspnoea, acts as galactagogue and helpful in post delivery care. In this article we will review about Panchjeerak gudam ingredients, method of preparation, indications and its dosage.

Introduction
It is an ancient formula of herbal ingredients in the texts of Sahasrayogam prepared from a combination of many drugs. It is considered as a health tonic or supplement especially to the females. This formulation corrects digestive, reproductive ailments and postnatal conditions. It is the combination of ghee and milk infused with 18 herbal drugs. This formulation also corrects common ailments like fever, infection, cough, asthma, anaemia and postpartum debility and fatigue.  Jeera (cumin seeds) is the primary ingredient of this preparation having lots of medicinal properties.

Classical Indication
Pancha Jeeraka gudam is described as a semi solid consistency medicine in classics. Among all dosha vata, pitta and kapha it helps in pacification of vitiated vata dosha. It is used for female reproductive health, digestive and respiratory issues. The indications mentioned in classics are as follows-

Sutika (postnatal care)
Yonivyapada (vaginal disorders)
Kasa, swash (cough, breathlessness)
Jawar (fever)
Kshaya (tuberculosis)
Halimaka (obstructive jaundice)
Pandu (anaemia)
Daurgandhya )bad odour)
Mutarkrich (dysuria)
Vataj disorders.
Ingredients
The list of ingredients are listed below-

Jeerak (Cuminum cyminum)- 40g
Hapusha (Juniperus communis)-40g
Dhaniya (Coriandrum sativum)-40g
Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) -40g
Badar (Ziziphus jujuba)-40g
Yavani (Trachyspermum ammi)- 40g
Ajmoda (Apium graveolens)- 40g
Hingu (asafoetida)-40g
Kasmard (Cassia angustifolia)-40g
Pippali (Piper longum)-40g
Vashpika/ tulsi (Ocimum sanctum)- 40g
Chitrak (Plumbago zeylanica)-40g
Ksheruk (Scirpus grossus)- 160g
Nagar (Zingiber officinalis)- 40g
Kustha (Sausseria lappa)– 40g
Guda (jaggery)- 4kg
Goghrita (cow’s ghee)- 640g
Gokshura (cow’s milk)- 1.28 litres
Benefits Of Ingredients
Jeerak (Cuminum cyminum)- Cumin seeds are used as they are antioxidants with low calories and improve digestion. It reduces inflammation and helps in reducing weight in obese patients. It acts as a natural laxative and prevents infection and has strong healing properties.
Hapusha (Juniperus communis)- It is used to manage cough, cold and shortness of breath. Its seeds maintain skin diseases and reproductive health. It increases blood circulation and correctsGI related problems like indigestion, bloating, and flatulence.
Dhaniya (Coriandrum sativum)- Coriander acts as diuretic and flushes extra sodium from the body and maintains blood pressure. It maintains cholesterol, sugar levels and prevents various infections. It promotes eye, skin, hair, heart and brain health.
Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus)– It boosts the immune system, helps in hormonal balance and promotes lactation. It reduces inflammation, boosts immunity, removes toxins from the body and corrects menstrual, postpartum disorders.   
Badar (Ziziphus jujuba)- It is a rich source of nutrients, vitamin A, C, it has laxative properties and reduces fever, bacterial infections. It improves muscle strength, weight and has great wound healing properties.  
Yavani (Trachyspermum ammi)- Yavani seeds are used to promote digestion and come over anorexia. It is aromatic, having hot potency and manages constipation,bloating, abdominal pain, indigestion, worm infestations, etc.
Ajmoda (Apium graveolens)- Ajmoda is very useful for urinary tract disorders, cardiac health and digestive disorders. It reduces inflammation, prevents infections, indigestion, bloating and vataj disorders.
Hingu (asafoetida)- It reduces inflammation of blood vessels, reduces headache and has abortifacient properties. It is mainly used for digestive and respiratory disorders like cough, cold, indigestion, flatulence, spams.
Kasmard (Cassia angustifolia)- It improves reproductive health and balances all three dosha vata, pitta, kapha. It is used as a laxative and diuretic agent having hot potency. Traditionally it was used as purgative, tonic and anti helminthic.
Pippali (Piper longum)- It acts as decongestant, expectorant and bronchodilator so corrects cold, cough and asthma like conditions. It reduces mental stress, anxiety and improves both male and female reproductive health.
Vashpika/ tulsi (Ocimum sanctum)- It reduces metabolic and psychological stress. It is a rich source of vitamin C and zinc, preventing various infections, microorganisms. It lowers blood sugar, cholesterol levels and joint pain.  
Chitrak (Plumbago zeylanica)- Chitrak helps in managing jaundice, urinary calculi, skin diseases and internal abscess. It is effective in GI disorders, cardiac and hepatic ailments. It has antiseptic and anthelmintic properties.
Ksheruk (Scirpus grossus)- This plant extract is used for managing diarrhoea, thirst, jaundice and strengthens cardiac muscles. It promotes lactation, reduces fever and burning sensation.
Nagar (Zingiber officinalis)- Ginger boosts digestion, immunity and pain related symptoms. It has anti-inflammatory properties and prevents PMS symptoms. It corrects upset stomach and cold, cough-like symptoms.
Kustha (Sausseria lappa)- It has an antimicrobial effect on the intestine and promotes digestion. It helps in blood purification so it corrects dermatitis, eczema, psoriasis, etc. It acts on all vata, pitta and kapha dosha.
Guda (jaggery)- It promotes weight loss, digestion and eliminates acidity. Jaggery is a good source of potassium and electrolytes to boost metabolism, strengthens muscles. It manages anaemia and menstrual problems.
Goghrita (cow’s ghee)- Ghee is rich in various vitamins and nutrients so boosts immunity, metabolism. It has healthy fats which proves beneficial to postnatal mother and child care as it reduces pitta-vata in the body.
Gokshura (cow’s milk)- Milk contains proteins, calcium and proteins so it improves bone health. It provides hydration, reduces stress and calms nervous system stress.
Method Of Preparation
The steps for preparation of Panchjirak guda are as following-

Firstly collect all the drugs mentioned above and wash them properly.
Fine powder of all the drugs are prepared and filtered through a mesh.
Then powdered drugs are fried in go ghrita till it attains light red colour.
Now cow’s milk is boiled and by adding jaggery till it attains linctus form.
Add goghrita bharjita churna to linctus by continuous stirring.
Mix the solution properly and store it in a clean airtight glass container, keeping away from direct sunlight.
Properties
The properties of Panchjeerak guda are given as follows-

It corrects digestive disorders, act as carminative.
Maintains respiratory ailments.
Provides postnatal care to mothers.
Corrects female health related issues.
Regulates metabolic activities.
Promotes nourishment to the foetus.
Has anti spasmodic, appetiser properties.
Indications
The indications of Panchjeerak guda are given as following-

Postpartum disorders
Cough, cold, fever
Asthma
Anaemia
Indigestion
Anorexia
Vaginal disorders
Body strength
Attain body weight
Postnatal care
Contraindications
Prevention should be taken by diabetic and dyslipidemic patients.
Not given during pregnancy.
No other side effects are not seen.
Dosage / Usage
10 grams twice daily after meals.

Anupana
With warm milk.

Taste
Sweet, Bitter (Madhur, Tikhat)

Smell
Like Jaggery

Conclusion
The above mentioned formulation is collected from ancient ayurvedic resources, which work as a tonic to the females with many health benefits. It manages reproductive disorders, respiratory disease, digestive ailments, etc. Among all dosha it mainly works on pacifying aggravated vata dosha and its related disorders. So this formulation can be administered by females in the postpartum period, for any concern you may consult to the physician.


88. Sitopaladi Churna
Reference: Ayurved Sar Sangrah, Churna Prakarna
INTRODUCTION
Sitopaladi Churna is an herbal formulation which helps in balancing kapha and digestive disorders. This formulation helps in curing asthma, cold, cough, sinusitis, bronchitis. Apart from these it can also help in treating anorexia, low digestive fire, muscular cramps etc. Sitopaladi Churna pacifies both kapha and pitta, fever caused due to aggravated kapha. It also keeps weakness, lethargy, headache at bay.

INGREDIENTS
Rock Candy
Vanshlochan (Bamboo silica)
Long pepper (Piper longum)
Green cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum)
Cinnamon (Cinnamomum zeylanica)
METHOD OF PREPARATION
Clean and crush all the ingredients separately to form a fine powder. Combine them well and sift them through a muslin cloth to remove any coarse particles. Store this powder in an airtight jar away from heat, light and moisture.

DOSAGE
2 grams with 6 grams with clarified butter and 1 gram honey or it can be taken with only honey.

INDICATIONS
Cold
Cough
Bronchitis
Lung disorders
Intercostal neuralgia
Tuberculosis
Rhinitis
Burning sensation in soles and palms
Asthma
Weakness
Low digestive fire
Muscle cramps
Numbness of tongue
CONTRAINDICATIONS
It is one of the safest medicines and has no side effects.
It can also be consumed during pregnancy and lactation if taken under medical guidance.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


89. Trikatu Churna
Trikatu Churna is not a very complex one, it is just a mixture of three spices. Trikatu churna is a powdered formulation and it sits in two categories that are herbs and dietary herbs. Consuming this Ayurvedic formulation escalates the heat production in the body and as a result increases the production of bile juices and bile salt secretion. Also, it is considered to be a fat burner, antiemetic, anti-inflammatory, expectorant. It is also known as Trikatu choornam, Katutraya churna, Kadutraya churna, three peppers.

Ingredients
Black Pepper (Piper nigrum)
Long pepper (Piper longum)
Dried ginger (Zingiber officinalis)
Method of Preparation
Clean all the ingredients and crush them separately till it is finely ground. Now, mix all the ingredients well. Sift them for the final time with the help of a muslin cloth.

Medicinal Properties
Trikatu Churna possesses useful properties like anti-allergic, carminative, anti – flatulent, natural antihistamine, anti-viral, expectorant, carminative, appetizer & digestive stimulant, hypo-glycemic, antiemetic, anti-inflammatory that bring healing effects to the body system.

This Ayurvedic medicine is useful in improving digestive fire and promotes the proper breakdown of food. It stimulates the secretion of digestive juices which increase appetite and also regulate the formation of hydrochloric acid which further help to prevent gaseous distension. It is beneficial to patients suffering from diarrhea, cramps, bloating or gas associated with mucus in stool or having sticky stools. Trikatu churna is a good choice to be prescribed in IBS.

It also acts as a natural anti-histamine, preventing any infection and inflammation of the gastric mucosa. It provides protection against allergic reaction. It enhances body warmth and decreases body pains, heaviness, fatigue, restlessness etc.

It has effective results in respiratory problems due to bronchodilator properties. It has ability to lessen the production of phlegm. It is also helpful in managing the asthma, by strengthening the respiratory organs making it to fight against repeated attacks of asthma.

It has ability to lower the bad cholesterol and triglycerides. Also improves blood channels via detoxifying properties. It provides relief from joints pain and stiffness in case of gout.

Indications
Regulates cholesterol level
Hypertension
Common cold
Asthma
Constipation
Irritable bowel syndrome
Bloating
Flatulence
Anorexia
Indigestion
Gout
Dosage
½ gram to 2 grams after meals with lukewarm water or honey.

In case Trikatu has to be consumed by people suffering from gastritis, then it is taken with Shankha Bhasma.

Contraindications
Over dosage might cause heart burn and acidity.
It increases the amount of heat in the body.
Mouth ulcers.
Burning taste.
It can be taken in pregnancy and lactation under medical supervision.
Redness in the eyes.
Bleeding disorders.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


90. Triphala Churna
Reference: Bhavaprakasha Nighantu, Haritakyadi Varga, 42, 43
Triphala Churna is among the one of most famous ayurvedic medicine. It is prepared by mixing the equal amounts of Amalaki, Haritaki and Bibhitaki. It is packed with the rejuvenator, laxative, anti-oxidants and detoxifying activates. This herbal powder is used to treat the various diseases like constipation, weight loss, dyspepsia, indigestion, piles etc.

Ingredients
Amalaki – Emblica officinalis – Indian gooseberry
Haritaki – Terminalia chebula – Chebulic Myrobalan
Bibhitaki – Terminalia bellirica – Belleric Myrobalan
Method of Preparation
Dry powder of fruit rind of these three fruits are mixed in equal proportions to make the Triphala Churna.

Medicinal Properties
Triphala Churna acts as a complete health supplement because of its important and effective medicinal properties like Antioxidant, Anti-Inflammatory, Antibacterial, Carminative, Digestive Stimulant, Adaptogenic and Antiviral, Anti-Cancer etc.

It is best indicated herbal powder in chronic constipation and other digestive issues. It helps to clear ama (indigestive food) and promotes easy passage of stools.

Its regular use is effective in diabetic patients. Being rich in anti-oxidant property, it diminishes cellular resistance to uptake insulin and helps in a proper utilization of insulin in the cells.

It is extremely beneficial in skin diseases. Its anti-ageing effect helps in delay aging, preserves the skin health, and prevents the premature greying of hair. It is even useful Ayurvedic remedy for eyes problems as it can improve eye sight and also manage the computer vision syndrome.

It can even control the cholesterol level due to wonderful detoxifying properties.

It can maintain the body temperature by controlling the chronic fever and helpful in relieving laziness and eases with vertigo or dizziness. Also a very good and efficient Ayurvedic formulation to lose weight in case of obesity.

Indications
Weight loss (Obesity)
Constipation
Bowel cleanser
Flatulence
Abdominal Distension
Detoxify the body
Jaundice
Pyorrhea
Anemia
Asthma
Cough
Skin diseases
Improves eye sight
Improves taste
Treatment of chronic fever.
Dosage
Take 1 – 3 grams of this Churna along with honey, ghee or warm water, before food.

Side Effects
Burning sensation may occur in body if patients have the sensitive stomach.
High dosage may lead to lack of sleep.
Note – It is mandatory to inform your doctor, when people with diabetes are taking Triphala Churna.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


91. Jatiphala Churna (Jatiphaladi Churna)
Reference – Sharangdhar Samhita Madhyama Khanda 6.
Introduction
Jatiphala Churna (Jatiphaladi Churna) is an ayurvedic formulation that consists of multiple effective herbs. The main herb of this Churna formulation is jatiphal (nutmeg). This is a seed kernel of the fruit. This herb is known to contain various medicinal properties like antiseptic, carminative, astringent, stomachic, anti-peristaltic and spasm relieving etc.

Ingredients
Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans)
Tvak (Cinnamomum zeylanicum)
Ginger (Zingiber officinale)
Karpura (Cinnamomum camphora)
Pippali (Piper longum)
Tila (Sesamum indicum)
Vidanga (Embelia ribes)
Maricha (Piper nigrum)
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis)
Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticum)
Ela (Elettaria cardamomum)
Talisa (Abies webbiana)
Nagakesara (Mesua ferrea)
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)
Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanicum)
Patra (Cinnamomum tamala)
Chandana (Santalum album)
Tagara (Valeriana wallichi)
Upakunchika (Nigella sativa)
Tavakshiri (Bambusa bambos)
Bhang (Cannabis sativa)
Sugar
Method of preparation
Take all the herbs except bhang up to 10 grams and bhang up to 200 grams. Sugar took up to 400 gram. Powder all the herbs separately and mix together after that. The Jatiphala Churna is prepared for use.

Dose
One to three grams with water, one or two times a day after meals.

Indications
Cold and cough
Sprue syndrome
Anorexia
Chronic diarrhea
Helpful in asthma
Dysmenorrhea
Menorrhagia
Contraindications
Avoid in case of diabetes.
Over dose can cause gastritis and burning sensations.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



92. Yavakshar
Reference: Sushruta Samhita
INTRODUCTION
Yavakshar is a formulation which is alkaline and is prepared from barley [Yava] which comprises of potassium carbonate. It helps in treating urinary disorders, abdominal disorders. This formulation acts as a diuretic and also induces perspiration. It helps in balancing Vata and Kapha Doshas. It is also very useful in Non – Cancerous prostate enlargement.

INGREDIENTS
Dried 5 parts of barley.

METHOD OF PREPARATION
Clean and dry the entire barley plant and put it in an iron pan and let the plant burn down to ashes. Let it cool down. Collect the product and add 4 times water in it and mix it well. Strain it through a muslin cloth in an iron container and keep them overnight. Filter the liquid floating on the surface over a precipitate into a clean container and repeat this process thrice. Heat this filtrate over low flame till the entire water content gets evaporated. After this process, white colored product is obtained which is then stored in a sealed jar.

DOSAGE
125 mg to 500 mg before meals orally or applied externally as advised by your doctor.

INDICATIONS
Enhances digestion
Prostate enlargement
Urine retention
Other urinary disorders
Piles
Liver and spleen disorders
Anemia
Malabsorption syndrome
Bloating
Constipation
Obstruction in throat
CONTRAINDICATIONS
It should be avoided by males getting treatment for infertility as it can affect the sperm production.
Over dosage might cause a burning sensation.
People who are emaciated, exerted should avoid this formulation.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



93. Kshargutika
Reference – Bhaishajya-Ratnavali Mukharogadhikar 960/94-95
Introduction
Kshargutika is an Ayurvedic formulation. This is a classical remedy used in the treatment of every throat and oral diseases.

Ingredients
Pippali (Piper nigrum)
Chavya (Piper chava)
Chitrakmool (Plumbago zeylanica)
Shunthi (Zingiber officinale)
Talishpatra (Abies webbiana)
Choti Elaichi (Elettaria cardamomum)
Dalchini (Cinnamomum verum)
Palash Kshar (Butea monosperma)
Ghantapatlakshar (Alkali of Stereospermum suaveolens)
Yavakshar (Hordeum vulgare)
Purana Gud (Old jaggery)
Description of Ingredients
Pippali – This is an effective herb for throat infections. It is helpful in sore throat, tonsillitis, stomatitis, mouth ulcers. This herb is also effective in indigestion, anorexia, vomiting etc.
Chavya – This herb is useful in anorexia, constipation, indigestion, abdominal pain, bloating etc. This is also effective in throat infections.
Chitrakmool – The roots of this herb are very beneficial in a variety of diseases. This is one of the good digestive and carminative herbs used in the treatment of indigestion, bloating, flatulence etc. This herb is also beneficial in mouth problems. It has an expectorant effect also.
Shunthi – This is one of the best ingredients in throat infections. It acts as an expectorant and helps in cough and cold. It is a good appetizer and digestant.
Talishpatra – It is an Ayurvedic medicinal plant. Its leaves are used in the treatment of respiratory diseases such as cough, cold, asthma, chronic bronchitis and upper respiratory infections.
Choti Elaichi – It is used in the treatment of throat infections, mouth ulcers, indigestion etc. It has a strong, unique taste and extensively soothing aroma. This is useful in dyspnea, stomach pain, nausea, vomiting and used to expel the phlegm out of the body.
Dalchini – This is an aromatic spice obtained from the bark of severe trees of the cinnamon. It helps to maintain the blood sugar level, control, vomiting, reduces breathlessness etc. It is also used in common cold, cough and tonsillitis.
Palash Kshar – This is an alkaline Ayurvedic medicine in powder from. It is used in the treatment of kidney, spleen and liver disorders. It is a natural diuretic. It is used in Ayurvedic treatment for chronic fever, oedema, malabsorption syndrome etc.
Ghantapatlakshar – It has anti-inflammatory action and is used over various inflammations. It is useful in balancing Vata dosha. It is also helpful in piles and acts as a blood purifier.
Yavakshar – It is an Ayurvedic medicine, used in treating urinary diseases, abdominal pain, bloating etc. This alkali is prepared from the whole plant of barley. It is beneficial in throat obstruction, coughing etc.
Method of Preparation
Take all these ingredients in equal quantity (1 part each).
Make a fine powder from all the ingredients.
Take gud and little water in a stainless steel container and make sugar syrup over flames.
When this preparation becomes very thick then adds all the above mentioned ingredients in this sugar syrup.
Make a tablet like a size of ber (Indian jujube) and cover it with Erandapatra (leaves of Ricinus communis) and keep this formulation under the tree (Ghantapatla tree) for 1 week.
After 1 week keep this in a glass container.
Medicinal Properties
Kshargutika is a classical Ayurvedic formulation. It is used in the treatment of Throat infections. This formulation shows great effect in chronic cough. It is useful in balancing kapha dosha. The ingredients are beneficial in sore throat, tonsillitis, mouth ulcers, bad breath, pharyngitis etc.

Indications
Tonsillitis
Pharyngitis
Laryngitis
Mouth ulcers
Stomatitis
Dosage
It should be taken sublingually 2- 3 times a day (2- 3 tablets).

Cautions
It should be taken under medical advise.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



94. Ashtakshari Gutika
Reference – Sahasrayogam gutika prakaranam 17/ 1
Abstract
Ayurveda describes various types of formulation in classical texts such as oil, ghee, rasa, bhasma, gutika/ tablet forms. These days tablets are the most convenient form of medicine as it is easily accessible, taken. This gutika preparation has anti diarrheal, constipating and digestive properties. It contains herbomineral and toxic ingredients which can affect the brain, heart so always used with caution.

Introduction
Ashtakshari gutika is a standardised tablet formulation prepared from various herbal medicines. It has anti diarrheal, carminative and antispasmodic action. This preparation helps in improving intestinal and gut health. These tablets should be taken under medical supervision as it contains ahiphena (Papaver somniferum) and shudh hingul like ingredients. Thos preparation contains 16 ingredients which only acts on digestive disorders. The main indication of this formulation is malabsorption syndrome, loose stools, colic pain and digestive weakness.

Classical Indication
According to classics, Astha kshari gutika is mentioned in the text of Sahasrayogam to improve gut health or abdominal disorders. Among all dosha (vata, pitta and kapha), it helps in pacifying vata and kapha dosha. Some of the classical indications mentioned are as follows-

Grahani (IBS- Irritable bowel syndrome)
Arsha (Hemorrhoids)
Atisara (Loose stools)
Pravahika (Dysentery)
Shula (Colic pain)
Anaha (Abdominal distension)
Ingredients
The list of ingredients used are listed below-

Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum)– 1 part
Shweta chandana (Santalum album)- 1 part
Rakta chandana (Pterocarpus santalinus)– 1 part
Ajaji (Myristica fragrans)– 1 part
Shuddha hingula (Cinnabar- mercury compound)- 1 part
Pippali (Piper longum)– 1 part
Hingu (Asafoetida)– 1 part
Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum)– 1 part
Rasana (Pluchea lesiulata)– 1 part
Sunthi  (Zingiber officinalis)- quantity sufficient (qs)
Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum)– qs
Dusparsha (Solanum xanthocarpum) -qs
Musta (Cyperus rotundus)– qs
Yavani (Trachyspermum roxburghii)– qs
Dhayanak (Coriandrum sativum)– qs
Jambhira (Lemon juice)- qs
Benefits Of Ingredients
Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum)- It is a thick latex obtained from poppy seeds. These seeds mainly act on vata dosha and increase kapha dosha. It has a great role in loose stools, dysentery or abdominal pain like symptoms. It also calms the mind, anxiety, muscular spasms, pain. It acts as nerve sedative, relaxant, analgesics and calming in nature.
Shweta chandana (Santalum album)- Chandan helps in managing lower GI related issues such as decreased inflammation from intestines and urinary system. It prevents growth of bacteria and balances pitta dosha so also corrects digestive issues. It also has entero toxic properties so prevents diarrhoea like symptoms.
Rakta chandana (Pterocarpus santalinus)- This variety of chandan plays a protective role in abdominal issues, heals gastric ulcers and reduces production of gastric acid. It has cold potency and wound healing properties.
Ajaji (Myristica fragrans)- Ajaji has a cyto-toxic effect as it protects healthy cells and reduces inflammatory changes in the body. It has antibacterial properties, improves digestion, anorexia like abdominal disorders.
Shuddha hingula (Cinnabar)- Hingul works on balancing kapha, pitta dosha and manages conditions like nausea, vomiting, jaundice like conditions. It helps in managing liver and spleen disorders.
Pippali (Piper longum)- Pippali fruits are used as it has hot potency so is very effective in respiratory and digestive disorders. It has carminative and antiflatulent properties. It is beneficial in flatulence, bloating, abdominal distension like conditions. It has analgesic, anti helminthic and carminative properties.
Hingu (Asafoetida)- Hingu is the most beneficial drug for abdominal disorders like constipation, diarrhoea, indigestion, abdominal pain. It restores pH level of the body, maintains metabolism and provides strength.
Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum)- Ativisha is helpful in managing diarrhoea as it helps in absorption of water from the body. It promotes digestion, prevents infections and corrects indigestion problems. It enhances weight loss and improves immunity.
Rasana (Pluchea lesiulata)- Rasna helps in abdominal disorders like indigestion, flatulence or loose stools. It improves digestive fire due to hot potency. It helps in reducing colic pain, abdominal distension and bloating
Sunthi  (Zingiber officinalis)- Dry ginger has antioxidant and antibacterial properties. It prevents various infections, pain and inflammations in the body. It improves digestion and reduces acidity problems.
Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum)- Jeera is an aromatic compound which has digestive functioning due to presence of thymol in it. It helps in reducing diarrhoea, loose stools, pain in abdomen like symptoms. It reduces production of gas and boosts immunity.
Dusparsha (Solanum xanthocarpum)- Kantakari improves digestive fire and corrects all ailments related to digestion. It is hot in potency so it manages indigestion, pain in abdomen and flatulence.
Musta (Cyperus rotundus)- It promotes lower abdominal comfort and GIT disorders. Without aggravating pitta it improves digestion, eliminates toxins from the body. It promotes healthy absorptions and corrects metabolism.
Yavani (Trachyspermum roxburghii)– Yvani helps in managing abdominal spasms, discomfort, heartburn and indigestion-like symptoms.  It promotes appetite by removing toxins from the body, corrects gas, constipation like digestive conditions.  
Dhayanak (Coriandrum sativum)- Coriander aids digestion and corrects diarrhoea, abdominal pain, indigestion, irritable bowel syndrome and improves liver health. It improves bloating, abdominal distension and intestinal disorders.
Jambhira (Lemon juice)- Due to the presence of citric acid it helps in production of gastric juices which aids in digestion. It helps in removing undigested food and aids appetite. It helps in bleeding gums and digestive issues.
Method Of Preparation
The steps for preparation of Ashta kshari gutika are given as follows-

Firstly collect all the drugs mentioned above and wash them properly.
Keep the drugs in the shade away from direct sunlight for drying.
Then prepare a fine powder of all ingredients mentioned. (separately)
Then triturate powder of all drugs with the mardan drugs in a clean vessel.
Mix the solution properly by continuously stirring it.
At last prepare the pills of the obtained solution and let them dry in shade.
After drying these pills should be stored in an airtight glass container.
This preparation is known as Astaksari gutika.
Properties
The properties of Astha kshari gutika are given as following-

It improves digestive disorders.
Maintains gut health.
Increases blood circulation.
Removes toxins from the body.
Reduces excessive mucus from the body.
Controls peristaltic movements.
It has carminative, analgesic properties.
Reduces inflammation, prevents infections.
Act as sedative and tranquilliser.
Indications
The various indications are given as following-

Indigestion
Dysentery
IBS (Irritable Bowel syndrome)
Anorexia
Piles
Sprue
Abdominal pain
Abdominal distension
Boosts energy
Contraindications
The conditions when Ashta kshari gutika is not given are as follows-

Heartburn
Ulcers
pregnant females
lactating mothers
Hypertension
Fluid retention
No recorded side effects are known but must be taken under medical supervision.
Keep away from the reach of children.
Dosage
1-2 tablets twice daily.

Anupana
Lukewarm water, Curd, Honey.

Taste
Bitter, Astringent (Tikht, Kashya)

Smell
Not particular

Conclusion
Above mentioned formulation is poly herbal prepared according to classics, mainly it has antidiarrheal effects. This preparation should be taken by proper medical supervision as it contains some minerals also with the herbs. It has deepan (Improves appetite), krimighan (worm infestation) and shulaghan (analgesics) properties. It helps in improving digestion, reduces colic pain, indigestion and if any severity you may concern to the physician.




95. Dashanga Lepa
Reference: Bhaishajyaratnavali
Introduction
Dashanga Lepa is a powdered Ayurvedic formulation which can be applied on the affected part after being mixed in clarified butter. It pacifies Kapha and Pitta. The name Dashanga means ten parts i.e. it is made from ten ingredients. It can help treat eczema, herpes etc.

Ingredients
Shirisha (Albizia lebbeck)
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Indian valerian root (Valeriana wallichii)
Sandalwood (Santalum album)
Cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum)
Jatamansi (Nardostachys jatamansi)
Turmeric (Curcuma longa)
Daru Haridra (Berberis aristata)
Kushta (Saussurea lappa)
Fragrant swamp mallow (Pavonia odorata)
Method of Preparation
Clean all the ingredients and crush them separately till it is finely ground. Now, mix all the ingredients well. Sift them for the final time with the help of a muslin cloth. Store the product in an air tight container away from heat, light and moisture.

Method of Usage
Take a generous amount of the powder and mix clarified butter to form a paste like consistency and apply on the affected areas to cure them.

Indications
Fever
Headache
Eczema
Herpes wounds
Hydrocele
Fungal infections
Skin disorders
Contraindications
There are no reported side effects of this herbal formulation.


96. Ayaskriti (Ayaskruti) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Ashtanga hrudaya chikitsasthana 12/28- 31.
Introduction
Ayaskriti (Ayaskruti) is an herbal formulation in which the word ayaskriti used to exhibit metals and minerals in a refined powder form, a nanoparticle form. It is a tonic in the condition of anemia. It is more commonly used in South India as a liquid Ayurvedic medicine. The word Ayas in sanskrit means Iron. The main mineral present in the ayaskriti is iron. Iron is an integral part of hemoglobin, about two third iron present in the hemoglobin. So very helpful to maintain blood and related disorders, immunity and more.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Part Used	Quantity
1.	Water for decoction			98.304 liters
Sandana dravya (fermentative agents)
2.	Jaggery			9.6 kg
3.	Honey			1.536 kg
Kwatha dravyas (herbs for decoction)
4.	Meshashrungi	Prosopis specigera	Leaf	960 g
5.	Arjuna	Terminalia arjuna	Stem bark	960 g
6.	Bhurja	Betula utilis	Stem bark	960 g
7.	Asana	Pterocarpus marsupium		960 g
8.	Khadira	Acacia catechu	Heart Wood	960 g
9.	Dhava	Anogeissus latifolia	Stem bark	960 g
10.	Tinisha	Lagerstroemia speciosa	Heart wood	960 g
11.	Shisham	Dalbergia sissoo	Heart wood	960 g
12.	Tala	Borassus flabellifera	Flower	960 g
13.	Ashwakarna	Acacia leucophloea	Heart wood	960 g
14.	Bhandi	Albizia lebbeck	Stem bark	960 g
15.	Shvetakhadira	Calotropis procera		960 g
16.	Shweta chandana	Santalum album		960 g
17.	Jongaka	Aquilaria agallocha	Heart wood	960 g
18.	Shaka	Grewia populifolia	Stem bark	960 g
19.	Rakta chandana	Pterocarpus santalinus	Heart wood	960 g
20.	Prakirya	Caesalpinia crista	seed	960 g
21.	Kramuka	Arecanut	Seed	960 g
22.	Shaala	Shorea robusta	Heart wood	960 g
23.	Kalinga (Indrayava)	Holarrhena antidysenterica	seed	960 g
24.	Palasha	Butea monosperma	Seed	960 g
25.	Chagakarna (Ajakarna)	Acacia leucophloea		48 g
Prakshepaka dravya (Herbal additives for aroma and for accelerating process of fermentation)
26.	Ajamoda	Trchyspermum roxburghianum		48 grams
27.	Bharangi	Clerodendron serratum		48 grams
28.	Katuki	Picrorrhiza kurroa		48 grams
29.	Pata	Cyclea pelteta		48 grams
30.	Vacha	Acorus calamus		48 grams
31.	Shudha loha patra (Iron foil)			48 grams
32.	Ajaji (Carum carvi)			48 grams
33.	Maricha	Piper nigrum		48 grams
34.	Kutaja	Holarrhena antidysenterica		48 grams
35.	Murva	Marsdenia tenacissima		48 grams
36.	Jeeraka	Cuminum cyminum		48 grams
37.	Hingu	Ferula foetida		48 grams
38.	Chavya	Piper retrofractum		48 grams
39.	Pasugandha	Cleome gynandra		48 grams
40.	Gandira	Coleus forskohlii		48 grams
41.	Ela	Elettaria cardamomum		48 grams
42.	Ativisha	Aconitum heterophylum		48 grams
43.	Kadvanga phalam	Oroxylum indicum		48 grams
44.	Sarshapa	Brassica alba		960 g
45.	Vidanga	Emblia ribes		960 g
46.	Pippali	Piper longum		960 g
47.	Chitraka	Plumbago zeylanica		960 g
48.	Pippalimoola	Piper longum		960 g
49.	Shunti	Zingiber officinale		960 g
Method of Preparation
Take the herbs of kvatha dravya and make the decoction of these.
Mix jaggery (guda) to the decoction and then filter.
Next step is the addition of honey to the decoction.
Now take the herbs of Prakshepaka dravyas and make their paste.
Add this paste to the decoction and transfer to another pot.
The pot already coated with honey, powder of long pepper and ghee.
Place this pot on the bundle of barley.
The thin iron sheets are heated to red hot by using khadir as a herbal fuel.
Dip these hot sheets in the decoction.
This process is conducted several times till whole iron turns in to powder form and gets dissolved in the decoction.
After iron dissolution, the pot is covered and sealed and starts the fermentation process.
On completion of fermentation, fermented material is filtered and placed in a tightly closed jar.
Keep it away from moisture and light.
Dosage
12-24 ml twice a day, after taking food.

Indications
Anemia
Urinary disorders
Piles
Obesity
Leucoderma
Worm infestation
Indigestion
Skin diseases
Contraindications
Hemochromatosis
Avoid unsupervised use in Pregnancy and lactation
Stomach irritation
Heart burn
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



97. Gandha Thailam
Reference – Ashtanga Hridayam Sutra Sthana 27/36-41- Bhanga Pratishedha Adhyaya
Introduction
Gandha Thailam is a polyherbal ayurvedic medicated oil taken orally for strengthening bones , joints, fractured bones and weak bones. It supports the bones in osteopenia and osteoporosis and prevents further bone loss. It mainly balances vata and pitta doshas.

Ingredients
Tila taila – Sesame seeds (Sesamum indicum) – 10 ml
Cow milk – 40ml
Qty. of Each Ingredients From 3 to 32 is 0.019gm
Madhuka – Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Nalada (Vetiveria zizanioides)
Valaka (Coleus vettiveroides)
Manjishtha (Rubia cordifolia)
Nakha (Ziziphus mauritiana)
Misi (Anethum Sowa)
Plava (Cyperus scariosus)
Kushta (Saussurea lappa)
Balatraya – Bala (Sida cordifolia)
Atibala (Abutilon indicum)
Mahabala (Sida rhombifolia)
Aguru (Aquilaria agallocha)
Kumkuma (Crocus sativus)
Chandana (Pterocarpus santalinus)
Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus)
Sarala (Pinus roxburghii)
Sarjarasa (Vateria indica)
Daru (Cedrus deodara)
Padmakadi Gana – Group of herbs explained as Padmakadi Gana
Eladi Gana – Group of herbs explained as Eladi group
Shaileya (Parmelia perlata)
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata)
Shalparni (Desmodium gangeticum)
Kaseruka (Scirpus grossus)
Kalanusari (Parmelia perlata)
Nata (Valeriana wallichii)
Patra (Cinnamomum tamala)
Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa)
Ksheerashukla – Kakoli (Roscoea purpurea)
Durva (Cynodon dactylon)
Description of Main Ingredients
Tila taila – Sesame seeds (Sesamum indicum)-Sesame is one of the widely used Ayurvedic formulations which is used in various forms. It is rich in VitE, natural antioxidant, contains vitK, magnesium, copper, calcium, iron, zinc and VitB6 which strengthens the bones, muscle and joints. Improves the quality of hair and skin and it calms the Vata and Kapha dosha and increases the pitta.
Padmakadi Gana – It is a group of Ayurvedic herbs is explained by Vagbhata in Ashtangahrudayam. It is nourishing and balances the pitta dosha. This group of herbs is used in the form of decoction and also as powder. It also acts as a natural galactagogue.
Madhuka – Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) – It is an important Indian medicine used in Ayurveda. It is a good anti-inflammatory and analgesic agent. It mainly pacifies vata and pitta doshas. Helps in relieving gastric problems, asthma, muscle cramps etc.
Daru (Cedrus deodara) – Devdaru helps to treat running nose and sinusitis. It can also manage joint problems such as inflammation, arthritis due to its anti-inflammatory property, and treat skin infections due to its antifungal properties.
Bilwa (Aegle marmelos) – It is rich in vitC, vitB1, vitB2, thiamine, riboflavin, carotene, calcium, potassium, fibre and rich in antioxidants. It has anti-inflammatory and laxative properties.
Method of Preparation
Sesame seeds are tied in a cloth and allowed to stay in flowing water and dry it in day sunlight for seven days. Then soaked it in milk and again dried it in day sunlight and then soaked in a decoction of madhuka daily, dried in a shade.
Once again soaked in milk, dried and removed from its husk and make a powder
Now mixed the powder form of sesame seeds with fine powder of above given herbs (from Nalanda to Eladi gana herbs) and macerated with milk.
Then the above herbal oil is cooked with the above remaining drugs (Shaileya to Durva) and add milk, oil in it.
When oil is left out, filter the oil in a glass bottle and named as Gandha Thailam.
Dosage & Usage
5-10 drops once or twice, administered before food with warm milk or warm water.
5 drops in Children and 10 drops in Adults.
Maximum dosage- 30 drops per day in divided forms.
Use it in a low dose.
The soft gel capsule can be taken in a dose of 1-2 capsules-twice a day.
Pharmacological Actions
Analgesic
Anti-inflammatory
Bone tonic
Anti-arthritic
Vata and Pitta shamak
Therapeutic Indications
Bone fractures
Joint dislocation
Sprains
Osteopenia
Osteoporosis
Osteoarthritis
Ligament injuries
Strengthens bone, joints, ligaments
Benefits
Fast healing of fractured bones and ligaments
Heals knee joint injuries
Reduces the risk of bone degeneration
Give strength to bone, joint and cartilage
Brings flexibility to joints
Relieves recurrent shoulder dislocation
Early intake prevents osteoporosis
Side Effects & Contraindication
Mainly no side effects are seen with normal dose.
If consumed in higher dosage may cause indigestion, nausea etc.
In pregnancy, use capsules only under doctor supervision.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


98. Abhaya-Nrisingha Rasa
Reference – Bhaishajya-Ratnavali Atisaradhikar 251/155-157
Introduction
Abhaya-Nrisingha rasa is a classical Ayurvedic product. It is effective in Atisara (Diarrhea). This is herbo-mineral formulation. This tablet has Afeem (Poppy) like smell.

Ingredients
Shuddha Hingula: Botanically it is known as Ferula assa-foetida. This pacifies vata and kapha dosha. It increases pitta dosha and relieves abdominal pain. This stimulates digestive fire and is used as an appetizer.
Shuddha Vatsanabha: This is known as Aconitum ferox. This is used as medicine after detoxifying this drug. It has antipyretic and diaphoretic properties. It pacifies vata, pitta and kapha dosha, especially balances vata and kapha dosha. It improves digestion and strength. It has analgesic properties also.
Shudha Parada: This pure form of mercury means purified mercury is used as medicine. Parada is silver coloured liquid metal also called Quicksilver.  Parada is a very effective drug. It balances all the three doshas (Vata, Pitta and Kapha). It has Aphrodisiac (Vrishya), Balya (Tonic), and acts as Rasayana (Rejuvenate) properties. It improves digestion and provides strength to the body.
Shuddha Gandhaka: Pure form of Sulphur is also used as medicine in various diseases.  This is a non-metallic solid element found in nature. In Ayurveda it is first detoxified to get shudha Gandhaka. It acts as laxative and alterative. Pure form of sulphur is used as Rasayan (Rejuvenative). It improves digestion by stimulating digestive fire.
Shudha Afeema: Afeem is known as Papavar somniferum. This herb pacifies kapha dosha, Grahi (absorbent), shoolprashmana (pain relieving), balya (strengthening), vrishya (aphrodisiac) and nidrajanan (sedative).
Abhraka Bhasma: Abhrak bhasma is calcined mica ash used in ayurveda for abdominal, liver, respiratory disorders. It has anti-inflammatory, antacid, nutritious and digestive properties.
Shunthi: Shunthi is known as Zingiber officinale. This is very effective in digestive problems. It pacifies Vata and kapha dosha. It is helpful in bloating, diarrhea and abdominal pain.
Maricha: Maricha is known as Piper nigrum. It improves the function of the digestive system. It has pungent taste and promotes digestive fire. This stimulates appetite. It has antibacterial properties.
Pippali: Pippali is known as Piper longum. It promotes digestive fire and has rejuvenating property. It pacifies Vata and Kapha. It is effective in indigestion, diarrhea, gastric problems and stomach pain.
White Jeera: Jeera is known as Cuminum cyminum. This stimulates digestive fire. It is effective in abdominal pain, bloating, flatulence, diarrhea and indigestion.
Method of Preparation
Take all drugs in equal quantity except Shudha Afeema which is taken in double quantity with respect to other drugs.
Firstly make kajjali from Shudha Parada and Shudha Gandhaka.
Then mix the powder of rest of the drugs and give nimbu swarasa (Lemon extract) bhavna.
Make 125 mg of tablet and dry them.
Put tablets safely in an airtight glass container.
Medicinal Properties
Abhya nrisingha rasa is an effective herbal remedy for the treatment of diarrhea. It contains trikatu and hingula which is very useful in enhancing digestive fire because diarrhea is generally because of low digestive fire i.e. Mandagni. These ingredients stimulate digestive fire and improve digestive power. Also it contains Afeema, vatsnabh which is very effective in abdominal pain.

Indications
Diarrhea
Diarrhea associated with fever
Irritable bowel syndrome
Abdominal pain
Dosage
1 tablet twice a day with honey or lukewarm water after meal.

Cautions
Avoid in pregnant and lactating women.
Avoid in children.
Take under the medical supervision as it contain Parada, Gandhaka, Afeem and Vatsnabha.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


99. Bilwadi Lehyam
Reference: Sahasrayogam – Leha prakarana – 1.
Introduction
Bilwadi Lehyam is an Ayurvedic medicine also known by other names like Bilwadi Leha, Bilwadi Lehyam, Bilvadi Leham, Vilvadi leham etc. It is used to treat the variety of stomach related complaints like vomiting, nausea, low digestion power etc.

Ingredients and How to Prepare?
Bilwa – Aegle marmelos – 1.536 kg is added with 12.288 liters of water, boiled and reduced to 3.072 liters, filtered. To this Kashayam (decoction) 768 grams of one year old jaggery is added and heated to semi solid consistency.

It is added with 12 g of each of the following:-
Musta (Cyperus rotundus), Coriander, Cumin, Caraway, Cardamom, Cinnamon, Nagakeshar (Mesua ferrea), Trikatu – Pepper, Long Pepper and Ginger.

Dosage
Take 5 – 10 g two times in a day.

This medicine is prescribed to be taken in small quantities or in repeated dosage of around 2 gms, multiple times a day.

Dosage for children below 5 years of age – 1 – 2 grams, once or twice a day, along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Dosage for children between 5 – 12 years of age – 5 grams once or twice a day along with a teaspoon of honey or warm water / milk.

Indications
Nausea
Vomiting
Low digestion power
Anorexia
Asthma
Contraindications
To be taken under medical supervision.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


100. Chandraprabha Vati
Reference – Sarngadhara Somite Madhyam Khanda 7/ 40-49
Abstract
Chandraprabha Vati is a standardized herbal tablet formulation mentioned in classical texts for numerous disorders. It prevents disorders of urinary tract, respiratory, gynecological and dermatological conditions. It helps in blood purifying, removing toxins and preventing microorganisms so it manages various skin conditions. Some believe it is a natural source of multivitamins which provides strength and immunity to the body. Overall it rejuvenates the body and reduces stress level. It also acts as a catalyst used with other medicines. So in this article we will discuss Chanderprabha vati’s composition, method of preparation, clinical significance in skin disorders and its dosage.

Introduction
Chandraprabha vati is a gutika (pills/ tablet) preparation for various types of systemic disorders. The Chandraprabha vati is made of two words “chandra” and “prabha” in which ‘chandra means moon’ and ‘prabha means glow/ shine’. So that means it is useful and makes the body glowing or shining like the moon. This formulation contains 37 ingredients with the base including sugar, guggllu. According to Ayurvedic texts it proves to be beneficial in types of diabetes, urinary calculi, abdominal discomfort, leprosy like skin diseases. It is a very effective health tonic to relieve stress, fatigue and increase physical strength of the body.

Classical Indication
According to classical texts, Chandraprabha vati is described as “sarvaroga pranashini” which means it manages all types of diseases. It acts on all three dosha i.e. vata, pitta and kapha. The various classical indications mentioned in classics are as following-

Prameha(diabetes)
Mutrakrich (dysuria)
Mutraghat (urine retention)
Ashmari(renal calculus) 
Vibandha(constipation)
Anaha, shula (abdominal pain, fullness)
Granthi arbudha (tumorous growth) 
Verdi roga (hernia) 
Swas-kaas (dyspnoea, cough)
Vicharchika  (psoriasis)
Andavridhi (enlarged scrotum)
Pandas (Anaemia)
Kamla (Jaundice)
Halimaka (Chlorosis)
Kustha, kandu (leprosy, itching)
Arsha, bhagandra (piles, fistula)
Plihodara (Splenomegaly)
Danto roga (teeth disorders)
Netra roga (ophthalmic disorders)
Artav ruja (menstrual pain)
Shark dosha (disorders of semen) 
Mandagni, aruchi (dyspepsia, anorexia)
Ingredients
Shaan Matra / 3 Grams Fine Powder Of Each Following Drug
Chandraprabha/ karpura (Cinnamomum camphora)
Vacha (Acorus calamus)
Musta (Cyperus rotundus)
Bhunimba (Andrographis paniculata)
Amrita (Tinospora cordifolia)
Daru/ Devdaru (Cedrus deodara)
Haridra (Curcuma longa)
Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum)
Darvi (Berberis aristata)
Pippali Mool (Piper longum)
Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica)
Dhanyak (Coriandrum sativum)
Triphala – Amalaki (Amblica officinalis), Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Vibhitaki (Terminalia billerica)
Chavya (Piper chaba)
Vidanga (Emblica ribes) 
Gajpippali (Piper chaba)
Vayosh – Sunthi (Zingiber officinalis), Marich (Piper nigrum), Pippali (Piper longum)
Masklike dhatu bhasma (Purified Copper Iron Sulphate)
Kara dway – Yava kshara (Hordeum vulgare), Sajji kshara
Lavan tray – Saindhav (Rock salt), Vida, Sauvarchala
Karasha Matra/ 12 Grams Each Of Following Drugs
Trivrit (Operculum terpenthum)
Danti (Baliospermum montanum)
Twak (Cinnamomum tamales)
Patar (Cinnamomum zeylanicum) 
Ela (Elettaria cardamomum) 
Vanshlochan (Bambusa bamboos)
Loha bhasma (24 grams iron ash)
48 Grams Of Following Drugs
Sita (Sugar)
Shilajit (Asphaltum)
Guggulu (Commiphora mukul)
Benefits Of Ingredients
Chandraprabha- It is very helpful in preventing various skin conditions and fungal infections such as it calms skin, reduces itching, inflammation. It moistures, soothes skin and reduces skin cracks.
Vacha- It keeps glowing skin, blemishes free and prevents from bacterial and fungal skin infections. It also has good healing property.
Musta- It has anti-microbial properties for treating various bacterial and viral infections. It maintains metabolic rate and assists in managing healthy skin and great inflammatory response. It also improves skin complexion.
Bhunimba- It balances pitta dosha and keeps blood toxin free. It helps in rejuvenating skin and reduces free radicals that affect dermis of skin. It helps in managing skin pigmentation and eczema.
Amrita- It improves the quality of skin by rejuvenation and helps in blood circulation so it makes skin clear, glowing and natural. It has anti-aging properties, clear dark spots, fine lines and boosts immunity.
Daru/ devdaru- It manages certain skin conditions like inflammation, wrinkles, acne or any type of infection. It helps in balancing vata and kapha dosha and vents from dry skin.
Haridra- It reduces inflammation within the body and acts as a natural detoxifier so it purifies blood. It keeps skin healthy by reducing acne, scars, depigmentation as it has skin lightening properties.
Ativisha- It reduces skin inflammation, fat accumulation, toxins (ama) from the body. It act as immuno modulator and have antimicrobial activity so prevents from various infections.
Darvi- It is a very potent herb for psoriasis and inflammatory conditions. It reduces bacterial growth and has antiseptic properties. It helps in preventing boils and wound infections.
Pippali Mool- Its roots are very useful in edematous swelling and restore body structure to normal state. It promotes relaxation to body tissues, calms nerves and has a great healing effect.
Chitraka- It is used as detoxificant, antiseptic and anti-helminthic. It helps in wound healing and prevents bacterial infections. It balances all three dosha and protects skin from harmful toxins.
Dhanyak- It is a rich source of Vit. C so it helps to detoxify skin, exfoliates skin and reduces rashes, sunburns. It helps in deep scrub/ cleaning of skin and makes clear glowing skin.
Amalaki- It has anti-aging properties and removes dead skin. It helps in preventing scalp fungal infections, premature greying of hairs. It acts as skin toner and removes pigmentation from the face.
Haritaki- It makes skin healthy by removing free radicals from the body and diminishing oxidative damage. It flushes toxins from the internal layer of skin and prevents various skin infections like rashes, boils.
Bibhitaki- It is known for its wound healing properties, prevents growth of microorganisms and reduces allergic reactions like acne, irritation, itching, etc.
Chavya- Used to manage diseases like ascites, skin disorders and worm infestations. It reduces edematous conditions and has analgesic properties. Improves skin texture and prevents ageing.
Vidanga- Due to its astringent and rejuvenating effect improves skin complexion, reduces hyperpigmentation and promotes wound healing. It improves blood circulation and manages eczema, leprosy.
Gajpippali- It reduces inflammation, bacterial growth and allergic conditions like itching, redness and swelling. It balances kapha and pitta dosha.
Shunthi- It boosts metabolism and has a skin cleansing effect. It brightens, exfoliates and moistens skin. It helps in skin nourishment and removes toxins from the body.
Marich- It is a rich source of Vit. C and A so helps in exfoliating skin like wrinkles. It is beneficial for skin, hair and acts as an antioxidant.
Pippali- It removes viruses, bacteria, fungi from the body and is used for healing wounds. It improves skin condition and has an anti-ageing effect.
Makshik dhatu bhasma- It increases skin elasticity, prevents inflammation, scarring, redness and speeds up the healing process. It stabilises skin proteins in it.
Yava kshara- It is an alkali drug beneficial for dermatological conditions. It balances vata and kapha dosha.
Sajji kshara- It is used to reduce any lumpy growth in any part of the body. It helps in healing wounds and ulcers.
Saindhav- It is used to enhance the glow of skin and reduce inflammation in psoriasis. It strengthens skin tissues and prevents dermatitis.
Vida lavan- It improves skin conditions like rashes, rosacea, eczema and has an anti-inflammatory, antibacterial effect.
Suvarchala- It acts as a cleanser for skin, unclog pores and removes dirt.
Trivrit- It is very helpful in itching, burning sensation, redness, scaling and oozing like conditions. It has an anti-allergic and anti-microbial effect.
Danti- It helps in wound healing as it has an antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effect. It reduces swelling, edema and skin allergies.
Twak- It is a potent herb used for repairing damaged tissues and manages various skin infections.
Patar- It helps in preventing dandruff, boils and different types of fungal infections.
Ela- It heals breakouts and purifies blood so manages skin complexion, blemishes.
Vanshlochan- The extract of this plant is used for strengthening the body and helpful in conditions pertaining to skin, hairs and nails (cosmetic concern).
Loha bhasma (24 grams) – it is very helpful in anaemia and improves general weakness. It improves skin texture, complexion.
Sita (Sugar) – It exfoliates skin and removes dead skin. It rejuvenates skin pores and it is rich in elastin and collagen.
Shilajit- It has a major anti-ageing property of skin as it repairs cell damage. It nourishes skin and prevents inflammation.
Guggulu- It improves itching, redness, skin discoloration. It is helpful in managing psoriasis, eczema like inflammatory conditions.
Clinical Significance Of Chandraprabha Vati In Skin Disorders
According to the various textbooks, Chandraprabha vati is mentioned for different types of skin disorders such as vicharchika (psoriasis) and kustha roga, its types (leprosy disease).
Chandraprabha vati works on all three dosha (vata, pitta and kapha) as when there is predominance of vata so it causes dry, rough, scaly skin (rukash, khara twacha).
When there is predominance of pitta dosha it causes burning sensation, hot flushes, etc. (ushma, daha, davthu) and when there is vitiation of kapha dosha it causes itching, swelling (kandu, shoath) like symptoms.
The cause behind kustha like skin disorders mentioned is ayurveda are as below-
Kaleda (Putrefaction/ suppuration)
Rakta Dushti (Impure blood)
Krimi (Worm infestation)
So in classics Chandraprabha vati is considered “uttam kaleda ghaan” which means best medicine to prevent from putrefaction.
This tablet formulation also has the property of blood purifying due to the presence of some ingredients like haridra (Curcuma longa), daru haridra (Berberis aristata), swaran makshika (purified copper iron sulphate), etc.
It also possesses krimighna property (prevent from worm infestations) due to the presence of musta (Cyperus rotundus), guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia), dhanyaka (Coriander), ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum), trivrit (Operculenis terpenthum), vidanga (Emblica ribes) and chitraka (Plumbago Zeylanica) in its composition.
This formulation has great properties against suppuration and worm infestation so it is very useful in various types of skin diseases associated with discharge, itching, redness, worms, etc.
As it has anti-inflammatory properties it prevents all types of rashes, boils, acne or any marks. It reduces edematous swelling or any growth in the body.
It has great exfoliating and cleansing properties so it helps in removing dead skin and it makes it clear, glowing. It also acts as antiseptic for dermis and prevents all infections with wound healing.
As there is predominance of pitta in skin diseases and this tablet is of cold potency so it acts very efficiently in skin related issues.
Method Of Preparation
The steps for the preparation of Chandraprabha vati are given as following-

Firstly collect all the drugs mentioned above and wash them properly.
All the plant origin drugs are dried and made into fine powders.
Now the described quantity of base drugs are taken, which are sugar and guggulu in a clean stainless steel vessel and mix them properly.
Then the required quantity of water is added into the vessel and heated over mild flame with continuous stirring.
Once the syrup-like consistency is formed of solution then add fine powder of drugs in small quantities.
Stir the solution well till desirable consistency is obtained. 
Then the mass of drugs is rolled up into vati/ pills according to desired size and shape. 
At last prepared pills are dried in shade and stored in a clean airtight glass container.
Properties
The properties of Chandraprabha Vati are given as following-

Has anti-inflammatory and anti-microbial activities.
It acts as a blood purifier, have an allergic effect.
Helps in oxygenation of blood.
It acts as a muscle relaxant, removing toxins from the body. 
It has an analgesic effect and provides body strength.
Effective in urinary, gynecological disorders.
It also prevents respiratory and dermatological conditions. 
Increase physical strength & decrease stress, anxiety.
Indications
The various indications of Chandraprabha Vati are given as following-

Urino genital diseases
Haematuria
Calculi with dysuria
Diabetes mellitus
Abdominal distension, pain
Skin allergies
Leprosy
Psoriasis
Anemia, jaundice
Gynecological disorders of both male and females
Contraindications
No such contraindications are there.
During pregnancy and lactation guidance taken by a physician.
Dosage
1-2 tablets twice a day after meals.

Anupana
With lukewarm water or milk.

Taste
Tikhta (Bitter), Katu (Pungent), Madhura (Sweet).

Conclusion
Chandraprabha Vati is a medicated natural supplement to improve overall body function. It corrects full body metabolism and rather than working on a particular system this tablet preparation works on the entire system of the body. It is a potent anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant to the skin. So it can be used in all the conditions mentioned above and if any severity you may consult to the physician.


101. Chitrakadi Vati – Uses, Benefits, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Charaka Samhita Chikitsa Sthana 15/96-97
Introduction on Chitrakadi Vati
Chitrakadi Vati is Ayurvedic medicine which is available in the tablet form. It is quite good to improve the digestion power of body. Use of this medicine is very useful to treat the problems like anorexia and indigestion. This Ayurvedic medicine has the digestive and detoxifying properties. It aids in the digestion and removes the accumulated toxins in the body.

Chitrakadi Vati balances the tridoshas – vata, pitta dosha and balances kapha in body.

Chitrakadi Vati Ingredients
10 g fine powder of each of:-
Chitraka – Plumbago zeylanica
Pippali moola – Long pepper root – Piper longum
Yava Kshara – Kshara of Barley – Hordeum vulgare
Swarjika Kshara
Sauvarchala Lavana – Sochal salt
Saindhava Lavana – Rock salt
Vida Lavana – Vida salt
Samudra Lavana – Common salt,
Audbhida Lavana
Shunti – Ginger Rhizome – Zingiber officinalis
Maricha – Black pepper – Piper nigrum
Pippali – Long pepper fruit – Piper longum
Hingu – Asa foetida – Ferula assa-foetida
Ajamoda – Ajowan (fruit) – Trachyspermum roxburghianum
Chavya – Java Long Pepper – Piper chaba
Matulunga Swarasa – Lemon juice or Dadima rasa – Pomegranate juice – Quantity Sufficient.
Method of Preparation
The fine powder of above mentioned ingredient is triturated with lemon juice or pomegranate juice and a paste is prepared. Further it is rolled into tablet form, dried and preserved.

Dosage
(500 mg tablet) Take one – two tablets, once or twice in a day before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Indications
Anorexia
Indigestion
Irritable bowel syndrome
Abdominal gas
Malabsorption
Obesity
Diarrhea with mucus discharge.
Side Effects
Over-dosage may result in the slight burning sensation in abdomen, heart burn, hyperacidity and gastritis.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Store in cool dry place.
Caution – People with high BP should take this medicine only under medical care, as it contains salt as ingredient.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


102. Dhanvantari Gutika (Vati) – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Sahasrayogam, Gutika Prakrana
Dhanvantari Gutika (Vati) is an Ayurvedic formulation used to treat the various diseases. It balances the vata and kapha doshas in the body. Use of this medicine is quite effective to treat the respiratory problems like asthma, cough and cold. This herbal medicine is quite effective to provide relief in the flatulence, bloating, hiccups, inflammation, arthritis and sprain etc.

Ingredients
Ela (Elettaria cardamomum)
Shunti (Zingiber officinale)
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)
Jati (Jasminum officinale)
Brihati (Solanum indicum)
Kiratatikta (Swertia chirata)
Jeeraka (Cuminum cyminum)
Kakkola (Piper cubeba)
Bhunimba (Andrographis paniculata)
Rudraksha (Elaeocarpus ganitrus)
Devadaru (Cedrus deodara)
Karpura (Cinnamomum camphora)
Karigudha (Kadivenna)
Gandha marjala virya (Mrigaretas) Kastoori (musk)100 gm each (made into fine powder)
Method of Preparation
Prepare pills in a size of 1 Masha with the above drugs taken in equal quantity and pounded with Jeeraka Kashaya and Himambha (Chandana Kashaya) and administer internally with the decoction of Panasa patra Vrinta, Bhumiamba and Jeeraka.

Dosage
One to two tablets thrice in a day mixed with the jirak water after meals or as directed by physician.

Indications
Indigestion
Vomiting
Flatulence
Hiccups
Asthma
Cough
Gaseous distention of abdomen
Nausea
Rheumatoid arthritis
Tastelessness
Breathlessness
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


103. Eladi Gutika (Vati)
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Raktapitta Rogadhikara 32-35
Eladi Gutika (Vati) is an Ayurvedic medicine formulated to treat the respiratory and gastric problems. This medicine is available in the tablet form. It is used to treat the throat infections, cough, cold, fever, vomiting etc.

Ingredients
Cardamom – Elettaria cardamomum
Talispatra – Cinnamomum tamala
Cinnamon – Cinnamomum zeylanicum
Pippali – Long pepper fruit – Piper longum
Sita – Sugar
Licorice – Glycyrrhiza glabra
Dates – Phoenix dactylifera
Raisin – Vitis vinifera
Madhu – Honey
Method of Preparation
Fine powder of herbs are taken in the specific quantities, mixed with honey and pills are rolled.

Dosage
Take 1-2 tablets twice or thrice in a day, after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Indications
Cough
Cold
Fever
Hiccups
Vomiting
Dizziness
Hematemesis (blood vomiting)
Abdominal pain
Sore throat
Asthma
Bronchitis
Hoarseness
Side Effects
There are no known side effects of using this Ayurvedic medicine.
Over-dosage may result in the slight burning sensation in abdomen.
It is better to avoid this medicine during pregnancy.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


104. Kankayan Gutika
Reference – Bhaishajya-Ratnavali Gulmarogadhikar 655/67-73
Introduction
Kankayan gutika is a classical Ayurvedic formulation. This gutika is useful in various abdominal problems. It is a herbo-mineral composition.

Ingredients
Shuddha Hingu (Ferula asafoetida) – 150 gm
Yavakshar (Hordeum vulgare) – 100 gm
Amalvetas (Garcinia pedunculata) – 100 gm
Karchur (Curcuma zedoaria) – 50 gm
Pushkarmool (Inula racemosa) – 50 gm
Dantimool (Baliospermum montanum) – 50 gm
Chitrakmool (Plumbago zeylanica) – 50 gm
Arharmool (Cajanus cajan) – 50 gm
Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) – 50 gm
Vacha (Acorus calamus) – 50 gm
Nishoth (Operculina turpethum) – 50 gm
Ajmoda (Carum roxburghianum) – 23 gm
Ajwain (Trachyspermum ammi) – 12 gm
Shwet Jeera (white variety of Cuminum cyminum) – 12 gm
Maricha (Piper nigrum) – 12 gm
Dhaniya (Coriander) – 12 gm
Description of Main Ingredients
Shuddha Hingu – This is the best ingredient for stomach problems. It is used in the food to prevent digestive ailment such as flatulence, indigestion, gas, bloating.
Yavakshar – It is used as an ingredient in many medicines. This is used to treat urinary diseases, abdominal pain, bloating and other gastric problems. It balances Kapha and Vata dosha.
Amalvetas – It is a digestive, laxative and cardiac stimulant. This is helpful in abdominal pain, bloating, severe constipation etc.
Karchur – It acts as an appetizer. It balances Vata and Kapha dosha. It is helpful in low digestive fire (Mandagni). Thus helpful in hemorrhoids, grahani, abdominal tumor etc.
Shunthi – This is the best digestive and appetizer. This is also useful in sore throat, cough and cold. It relieves us from abdominal pain.
Method of Preparation
Make a fine powder of all the ingredients.
Give bhavna with the extracts of Bijora Nimbu (Lemon).
Make 1 gm tablets and let them dry.
Keep tablets in a glass container.
Medicinal Properties
Kankayan gutika is an Ayurvedic formulation. The ingredients in this formulation are best for gastric problems. They pacify Vata and Kapha dosha and relieve abdominal pain, bloating and heaviness in the abdomen. These ingredients improve digestive power by stimulating digestive fire.

Indications
Abdominal tumor
Indigestion
Bloating
Heaviness in abdomen
Piles
Worm infestation
Dosage
1 tablet twice a day with warm milk or ghrit or cow’s urine or decoction of Triphala.

Cautions
It should be taken under medical supervision.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


105. Khadiradi Vati (Gutika)
Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Gulma Rogadhikara 56 – 62.
Introduction
Khadiradi Vati (Gutika) is an ayurvedic formulation that is formed of various herbs. One of the main herb is Khadira. Khadira is a very rejuvenating herb. The word khadira is a Sanskrit word, which means, alleviating the disease and stabilizing the body. This formulation is very effective in treating various body ailments.

Ingredients
Water for decoction – 49.152 liters, boiled and reduced to 12.288 litre.
Khadira – Acacia catechu
Arimeda – Acacia leucophloea
Karpoora – Cinnamomum camphora
Manjishta – Rubia cordifolia
Dhataki – Woodfordia fruticosa
Rasanjana – Aqueous extract of Berberis aristata
Prapaundarika – Nymphaea stellata
Yashti – Glycyrrhiza glabra
Chandana – Santalum album
Jatamansi – Nardostachys jatamansi
Haritaki – Terminalia chebula
Nagakeshara – Mesua ferrea
Padmaka – Prunus puddum
Laksha – Laccifer lacca
Vibhitaki – Terminalia bellirica
Usheera – Vetiveria zizanioides
Musta – Cyperus rotundus
Twak – Cinnamomum zeylanicum
Lodhra – Symplocos racemosa
Balaka – Pavonia odorata
Ela – Elettaria cardamomum
Padma – Nelumbium speciosum
Amalaki – Phyllanthus emblica
Gairika – Purified red ochre
Anjana – Aqueous extract of Berberis aristata
Manjistha – Rubia cordifolia
Katphala – Myrica nagi
Haridra – Curcuma Longa
Daruharidra – Berberis aristata
Phalini – Callicarpa macrophylla
Ela – Elettaria cardamomum
Vacha – Acorus calamus
Yavasa – Fagonia cretica/arabica
Agaru – Aquilaria agallocha
Pattanga – Caesalpinia sappan
Kankola – Piper cubeba
Jatikosha – Myristica fragrans
Lavanga – Syzigium aromaticum
Nakha – Capparis zeylanica
Method of Preparation
Take the ingredients according to given quantities. Take khadira up to 4.8 kg, arimeda up to 9.6 kg, karpoora up to 192 g, from ingredients number 5 to 36 took quantity up to 12 grams and 37 to 40 up to 48 grams.
Powder all the ingredients and add to the decoction.
Now dry and make the paste.
Make the pills from the paste.
Medicinal Properties
Khadiradi Vati is an herbal formulation in the form of a tablet. It is extremely beneficial in getting rid of bad breath, oral ulcers, teeth ailments etc. It works best when it is kept in the mouth and swallowed gradually. It has numerous properties like anti-inflammatory, astringent, expectorant and acts as an oral antiseptic also. The prime ingredient in this formulation consists of flavonoids, Catechin, Catechuic acid, Phloroglucin, Protocatechuic acid, Pyrocatechin and Quercetin. It has healing properties as it has a soothing effect on the throat and consists of antioxidants in a huge amount. It gives a clear voice and decreases hoarseness by reducing irritation and inflammation of vocal cords. It aids in pacifying all three doshas Vata, Pitta and Kapha. Catechu is widely used for the local treatment of otitis and otorrhoea. Khadiradi vati is used to treat mouth problems like diseases of lips, gums, teeth, tongue, palate, throat etc. Bronchitis (inflammation of the mucous membranes of the bronchi). It is used in Ayurvedic treatment of stomatitis, bad breath, diseases of teeth, dental caries, diseases of throat, tonsillitis, anorexia, locked jaw and such other diseases of buckle cavity.

Indications
Bad breath
Stomatitis
Teeth disease
Tonsillitis
Anorexia
Dental caries
Locked jaw
Throat ailments
Dose
Two capsules, three times a day, before or after meals.

Contraindications
Burning sensation due to over dose.
Take under medical supervision.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



106. Kutaja Parpati Vati
Abstract
Kutaja Parpati Vati is a proprietary Ayurvedic medication which is manufactured by Shree Dhootapapeshwar Limited, Mumbai which is helpful in the treatment of Diarrhea and Dysentery. It is caused by bacterial infection and dehydration is a dangerous side effect of diarrhea. It can happen due to a wide variety of reasons which can go away in a few days but sometimes it leads to various complications. There are different types of diarrhea such as Acute diarrhea (which lasts for 1-2 days), Persistent Diarrhea (which lasts for several weeks) and Chronic Diarrhea (which comes and goes over a long period of time). Causes may include Infections, various diseases and food intolerance.

Introduction
Kutaja Parpati Vati is an ayurvedic medication which is helpful in the treatment of Malabsorption syndrome, Intestinal Ulcers and diarrhea which is associated with Amoebiasis and antibiotics which are induced in diarrhea and Diarrhea due to intolerance of lactose. The key ingredients are Nut Grass, Kurchi and many more. The scrub Holarrhena antidysenterica which is known as Indrajav is found throughout India up to the height of 4000 feet. This plant can be found in Asia and Africa, in tropical and subtropical climates. Can be found all over India, in the deciduous forests of topical Himalayas at an altitude of 900-1250 meters.

Chemical Constituents Of Kutaja
The kutaja constitute – Resins, steroidal alkaloids, Phenolic acid, Tannins, Ergosterol, Conessine, Kurchine and Holarrhimine are the among alkaloids which are found in the bark.

Ingredients
Kutaja Parpati – 25 mg.
Kutaja Churna – 150 mg.
Musta – Nut Grass (root)- It is helpful in treating diarrhea which improves the burning sensation. As bitter and Astringent properties are so useful in pacifying Pitta and Kapha doshas.
Kutaj Kwath Bhavna – water decoction (Conessi Bark)
Shankh Bhasma – 25 mg (Calx of Conch) – Improves the colour of skin and is useful in the treatment of Gastritis and Vomiting. Provides relief in abdominal pain.
Kutaja (Churna, Kwath Bhavna and Parpati) – It is helpful in treating diarrhea, irritable bowel syndrome. Is useful in balancing Pitta and Kapha doshas, which provide nourishment and strengthen the dhatus. Has Antispasmodic and Anti-diarrheal properties. Has astringent properties and enhances the digestive system which purifies the blood. Soothes the mucous membrane of the GI Tract.
Uses Of Kutaja Parpati Vati
In malabsorption syndrome
Diarrhea
Intestinal Ulcers
Diarrhea due to lactose intolerance
Bacterial Infection
Digestive Disorders
Effect On Tridoshas
Balances Vata, Pitta and Kapha doshas.

Key Benefits
Improves the health of the stomach and its functions.
Assist the whole process of digestion.
Reduces the growth of bacteria.
Treats muscular pain and spasms.
Reduces bloating and flatulence.
To buy Shree Dhootapapeshwar Limited Kutaja Parpati Vati, please visit store.planetayurveda.com/products/kutaja-parpati-vati-60-tablets

Dosage
2 Tablets twice daily after meals with plain water.

Conclusion
Kutaja Parpati Vati is an Ayurvedic herbal supplement which is helpful in Digestive problems and in Irregular bowel Movements. Manufactured by Shree Dhootapapeshwar Limited with pure herbs without any side effects, balances tridoshas of the body.



107. Lavangadi Vati
Reference: Vaidyajivana, Shwasa Kasa Chikitsa
Introduction
Lavangadi Vati is an Ayurvedic medicine in tablet form used for treating upper respiratory infections like cough, congestion, cold and allergic respiratory conditions. It is demulcent, anti-inflammatory and expectorant in action. Clove is the main ingredient of this medicine. Clove has Kapha dosha balancing, antispasmodic, antiseptic and carminative properties. It reduces vata and kapha but increases pitta. It is hot in potency it increases blood pressure and pitta. Hence should be taken cautiously in high, pitta condition and high blood pressure.

Ingredients
Clove (Syzygium aromaticum)
Black pepper (Piper nigrum)
Bibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica)
Black Catechu/Heart wood extract (Acacia catechu)
Water concoction of Babul (Acacia Arabica)
Method of Preparation
Grind all the ingredients to a fine powder and triturate with the formed decoction, a semisolid paste will be formed and make pills from this paste and let them dry and store them in an air tight container.

Dosage
1 to 2 tablets twice a thrice a day after meals or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Indications
Respiratory problems like cough, colds, congestion, bronchitis, and asthma.
Dyspnea (difficult breathing)
Chest pain
Bronchitis
Irritation of throat
Cough and cold
Sore throat
Contraindications
Over dosage may cause slight burning sensation in stomach.
It can be administered during pregnancy just for a week or two.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


108. Puli Lehyam
Reference – Sahasrayogam Avaleha Yoga Prakaranam 13/ 29
Abstract
Among various varieties of preparations, leha/ lehyam is a thick syrup-like formulation having jaggery as its sweetening agent. Puli lehyam is also prepared by infusing different natural herbal medicines in base drugs like ghee used for nourishing mothers in the postnatal period. It provides strength, boosts immunity, reduces fatigue and tiredness. It is administered in the form of 1-2 tablespoons twice daily with warm water or milk. So, in this article we will discuss Puli lehyam’s herbal composition, methods of preparation, properties, indications and its dosage.

Introduction
Puli lehyam is a semi solid poly herbal formulation from ancient text named Sahasrayogam, mainly used in post delivery care of mother. It is beneficial in stopping bleeding after delivery and normal evolution of the uterus. It provides physical and digestive strength to the mother, with increasing energy level, reducing weakness, fatigue. This formulation is also known as Puli leha/ puli kulambu/ puli kuzhambu or puli lehyam. It contains garlic which helps in balancing both vata and pitta dosha, supports female health and regulates the menstrual cycle.

Classical Indication Of Puli Lehyam
Puli lehyam is a classical formulation mentioned in avaleha prakaranam (chapter) for various disorders. It is also known as Amlava lehyam. Among all dosha vata, pitta and kapha it helps in pacification of aggregate vata dosha. The various indications mentioned in classics are as follows-

Gulam (tumorous growth)
Shula nashak (reduces pain)
Antra roga (intestinal disorders)
Pandu (anaemia)
Ingredients Of Puli Lehyam
The list of ingredients used for preparation of Puli lehyam are given as following-

Churana Dravya
Pippali (Piper longum) – 10 grams
Shringver/ sunthi (Zingiber officinalis) – 10 grams
Marich (Piper nigrum) – 10 grams
Ramath/ hingu (Asafoetida) – 10 grams
Jeerak (Cuminum cyminum) – 10 grams
Krishan jeeraka (Carum carvi) – 10 grams
Siddharth (Brassica juncea) – 10 grams
Chavya (Piper chaba) – 10 grams
Chitrak (Plumbago zeylanica) – 10 grams
Gaja Pippali mula (Scindapsus officinalis) – 10 grams
Kalaka Dravya
Lahsun (Allium sativum) – 640 grams
Saindhav lavana (rock salt) – 40 grams
Drava Dravya
Paranajmoda swaras – (Apium graveolens) – 640 ml
Vrikshamla (Garcinia indica) – 640 ml
Takra (buttermilk) – 640 ml
Benefits Of Ingredients
Pippali (Piper longum) – Pippali helps in reducing inflammation, removing toxins and has an analgesic effect. It reduces intestinal infections and relieves menstrual pain. Pippali improves digestion and enhances libido.
Shringver/ sunthi (Zingiber officinalis) – Ginger powder has vata nashak property so it reduces all types of pain even menstrual pain also. It has antioxidant and antimicrobial effects so it prevents various infections. It improves digestion and blood circulation.
Marich (Piper nigrum) – It relieves from bloating, abdominal pain and various digestive disorders. It improves taste, anorexia, removes toxins from the body and maintains body weight. It has gastro protective and anti oxidant properties.
Ramath/ hingu (Asafoetida) – Hingu reduces inflammation of blood vessels and relieves pain. It reduces blood clotting, intestinal parasite and worm infestations. It improves digestion and corrects cold, cough, asthma like conditions.
Jeerak (Cuminum cyminum) – Jeera seeds are beneficial in digestive tract disorders. It has antioxidants, regulates metabolism and fat burning properties. It helps in detoxification of the body and acts as a natural laxative.
Chavya (Piper chaba) – It is useful in respiratory and abdominal disorders, pain, bloating, distension, constipation like conditions. It cures from worm infestations, acts as antioxidant, anti inflammatory, antifungal and antimicrobial in nature.
Chitrak (Plumbago zeylanica) – Chitrak manages conditions like migraine, jaundice, skin diseases, intestinal disorders. It improves gut health, reduces inflammation, muscular pain and has an anthelmintic effect.
Krishan jeeraka (Carum carvi) – It improves strength, immunity and relief from fever. It stimulates bile juice secretion and helps in digestion. It promotes weight loss, reduces inflammation and works as an antioxidant.
Siddharth (Brassica juncea) – Mustard seeds are a rich source of vitamins, calcium, potassium and folate. It reduces headache, edemas, inflammation in different parts of the body. It helps in protecting skin from infections and lowers glucose level.
Gaja Pippali mula (Scindapsus officinalis) – Root of pippali helps in regulating bowel movements and throat infections. It manages respiratory disorders like asthma, cough and intestinal parasites. It improves cognitive functioning, digestion and reduces over weight of the body.
Lahsun (Allium sativum) – Garlic improves gastric and brain functioning. It boosts immunity and lowers blood cholesterol, sugar levels. It helps in detoxification of the body and improves bone, muscles health. It aids digestion, regulates sleep cycles and promotes skin health.
Saindhav lavana (rock salt) – Rock salt boosts metabolism and relieves muscle cramps. It maintains skin, hair and digestive health. It reduces inflammation and removes toxins from the body. It is also beneficial in cold, cough and other viral infections.
Paranajmoda swaras (Apium graveolens) – Ajmoda manages urinary tract disorders, cardiovascular ailments and respiratory diseases. It reduces high blood pressure, decreased appetite, inflammation and various types of infections.
Vrikshamla (Garcinia indica) – It helps in weight loss by having carbohydrates and fat metabolism. It increases availability of serotonin in the brain and is very beneficial for obese persons. It also controls appetite and digestion.
Takra (buttermilk) – It contains less fat and is a rich source of protein and calcium. It reduces acidity, constipation and helps in hydration. Buttermilk helps in building strong muscles, bones, skin and hairs.
Method Of Preparation
The steps for preparation of Puli lehyam are given as following-

Collect all the drugs mentioned above and wash them properly.
Make fine powder of all the drugs and mix all the churan dravyas thoroughly by triturating in a clean vessel.
Add a paste of garlic and rock salt to the powdered drugs.
At last add drava dravya (decoction) prepared from herbs to the vessel and subject it for mild heating.
Cook the solution on mild heat till it attains semi solid (avaleha) consistency with continuous stirring.
Let it cool for some time and store in a clean airtight glass container by keeping away from direct sunlight.
Properties Of Puli Lehyam
The properties of Puli Lehyam are given as following-

Corrects post delivery issues.
Improves digestion.
Maintains blood circulation.
Provides strength to mother.
Improves reproductive health.
Corrects gastrointestinal disorders.
Indications Of Puli Lehyam
The various indications or Puli lehyam are given as below-

Postnatal care
Indigestion
Flatulence
Anorexia
Phthisis
Abdominal discomfort 
Hernia
Dysmenorrhoea
Menorrhagia
Obesity
Postpartum ailments
Contraindications
The conditions when Puli lehyam is not given are as follows-

Gastritis
Duodenal ulcerations
Sensitive digestive gut
Gastritis in the postpartum period
Dosage / Usage Of Puli Lehyam
5-15 grams twice daily after meals

Anupana
Buttermilk, Lukewarm water.

Taste
Katu (pungent)

Smell
Like Jaggery

Conclusion
Above mentioned formulation is semi-solid in consistency and it is mentioned in classical texts. This preparation is indicated in postnatal care of mother, abdominal discomfort, bloating or any digestion related issues. As we know in the postpartum period there can be predominance of vata dosha so it proves very beneficial. If there is excessive bleeding or amenorrhoea and any menstrual difficulties it proves to be very effective. So one can administer this formulation in such conditions mentioned above and of any severity you must concern to the physician.


109. Prabhakar Vati
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Hridrog Adhikara 66-67
Prabhakar Vati is a tablet, used in Ayurvedic treatment of heart diseases. It contains mineral origin ingredients and hence should only be taken under a doctor’s prescription. It is used in Ayurvedic treatment of heart diseases. It acts as cardiac tonic. It is also used as general co-prescription in many cardiac ailments.

Ingredients
Makshika Bhasma – Bhasma of Copper and Iron Pyrite
Loha Bhasma – Bhasma prepared from Iron
Abhraka Bhasma – Purified and processed Mica
Tavakshir – Bambusa bambos
Shuddha Shilajatu – Asphaltum
Arjuna – Terminalia arjuna
How to Make?
Fine powder of above ingredients is triturated with decoction of Arjuna, semisolid mass is prepared, and pills are made.

Dosage
125 mg – 250 mg, once or twice a day, after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Indications
Angina
Palpitation (abnormality of heartbeat)
Breathlessness
Heart problems
Cardiac diseases
Side Effects
This product should only be taken under strict medical supervision. Since it is indicated in cardiac diseases, self-medication with this product may cause serious side effects.

Note – Not suitable for pregnant and lactating mothers and children.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


110. Rajanyadi Churna
Reference: Ashtanga hridaya, Sutrasthana 2/37-40
Introduction
Rajanyadi Churna is a classical herbal powder that balances Vata and Pitta Doshas. This Ayurvedic medicine used to treat pediatric diseases. It is used in children to treat diarrhea, fever, jaundice and anemia. Turmeric, is key ingredient of Rajanyadi Churna.

Ingredients
10 g of each of fine powders of:-
Turmeric (Curcuma longa)
Daru (Cedrus deodara)
Sarala (Pinus roxburghii)
Shreyasi (Piper chaba)
Brihati (Solanum indicum)
Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum)
Prishnaparni (Uraria picta)
Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus)
Method of Preparation
Each ingredient in amount of 10gm. is ground to powder form separately and then these powder are mixed together to form Rajanyadi Churna.

Keep it in dry place stored in airtight container.

Dosage
Consume 1-3 grams along with honey and rice washed water, 1-2 times a day before or after meals or as suggested by doctor.

Therapeutic Uses
Rajanyadi Churna is a useful general tonic powder for children.
It is good for treating gastrointestinal tract disorder like diarrhea digestion, in children.
Also effective in treating Sprue and vomiting.
Effective remedy in fever, jaundice, anemia, asthma, cough and cold.
Improves the strength, immunity, Weakness and skin quality.
Contraindications / Side Effects
Over-dosage of this medicine may lead to constipation.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


111. Samshamani Vati
Reference: Siddha Yoga Sangraha, Jwara Adhikara, AFI Vol. II
Samshamani Vati is an Ayurvedic medicine which is formulated to treat the all types of fevers. It has antipyretic and anti-inflammatory properties. Giloya (Indian Tinospora) is used to prepare this Ayurvedic medicine. It balances Vata and Pitta dohsas in the body.

Ingredients
Guduchi (Giloya) – Indian Tinospora (stem) – Tinospora cordifolia
Method of preparation
Coarse powder of herb Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) is made.
It is boiled in the water until it reduced to a quarter parts. Then it is filtered.
It is further boiled to form a semi solid mass.
It is then rolled into pills form.
Medicinal Properties
Samshamani Vati is an Ayurvedic medicine formulated to manage fever. Major ingredient of this medicine is Giloya (Indian Tinospora). This herb has the great medicinal importance in Ayurveda to lower down the elevated body temperature in chronic fever. This medicine helps to strengthen the body’s immune system and enhances the body’s ability to fight against the various bacterial, viral and fungal infections. It is effective for weakness as it helps to boost up strength and energy in body.

Indications
Fever
Chronic fever
Anemia
Weakness
Dosage
(250 – 500 mg) – 1 – 2 tablets, one or twice in a day, before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Side effects
There are no known side effects with this medicine.
Pregnant, diabetic, lactating mothers and children should take this medicine only under medical supervision.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


112. Sarpagandha Ghan Vati
Reference: Siddha Yoga Sangraha (Bhrama, Anidra, Unmada Adhikara)
Sarpagandha Ghan Vati is a classical polyherbal medicine. It is used in the treatment of high blood pressure, lack of sleep, increased pulse, insomnia etc. It should only be used under strict medical supervision. It balances Vata and Pitta.

Ingredients
Sarpagandha – Rauvolfia serpentine – 10 g
Khurasani ajwain – Trachyspermum ammi – 2 g
Jatamansi – Nardostachys jatamansi – 1 g
Bhanga – Cannabis sativa – 1 g
Water for decoction – 8 parts, boiled and reduced to 1/8 part, filtered.
Method of Preparation
It is further added with fine powder of 1 g of Pippali moola – Long pepper root – Piper longum. Finally tablets are prepared.

Medicinal Properties
Sarpagandha ghan vati is an Ayurvedic medicine available in the tablet form. Herbs used in the formulation of this medicine comprise the calmative, diuretic, hypertensive etc. properties. This herbal medicine helps to pacify the nervous system hence it is good for insomnia. Being hypertensive in action, use of this medicine is quite good to maintain the normal blood pressure. In the problem of hypertension it regulates the blood pressure by maintaining the balance of myocardial oxygen. Sarpagandha ghan vati helps to flush out the toxins from body. It also helps in blood purification and maintains the proper blood supply throughout the body. Besides of this, it is good medicine for various neurological problems like anxiety, stress etc. Use of this medicine is quite effective in psychological disorders like uncontrollable emotion or excitement in hysteria.

Indications
Insomnia (Sleeplessness)
Hypertension (High Blood Pressure)
Dizziness
Irritability
Anxiety
Mania
Hysteria
Dosage
Take 1 tablet (375 mg) at night, before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Side Effects
This medicine should only be taken under strictly medical supervision.
Avoid this medicine in children, pregnant and lactating mothers.
Take this medicine only in prescribed dosage for particular time period only.
Avoid the over-dosage with this medicine because it may cause excessive sleep and low blood pressure (Hypotension).
Store in a cool dry place.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


113. Sanjivani Vati – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Sharangadhara Samhita Madhyama Khanda 7/28 – 33
What is Sanjivani Vati
Sanjivani Vati is an Ayurvedic medicine available in the tablet form. It is used in the treatment of dyspepsia, indigestion and gastro-enteritis etc. This medicine should be taken only under strictly under medical supervision. It balances Vata and Pitta doshas in the body.

Ingredients
10 g fine powder of each of
Vidanga – Embelia ribes
Ginger Rhizome – Zingiber officinalis
Long pepper fruit – Piper longum
Haritaki – Chebulic Myrobalan fruit rind – Terminalia chebula
Vibhitaki – Belliric Myrobalan fruit rind – Terminalia bellirica
Amalaki – Indian gooseberry fruit – Emblica officinalis
Vacha – Acorus calamus
Guduchi – Indian Tinospora (stem) – Tinospora cordifolia
Bhallataka – Semecarpus anacardium
Vatsanabha – Aconitum ferox
Gomutra – cow urine – Quantity Sufficient.
Method of preparation Sanjivani Vati
Fine powder of the above mentioned herb is triturated with cow urine. Then paste is prepared, dried and tablets are made.

Medicinal Properties of Sanjivani Vati
Sanjivani Vati, an Ayurvedic medicine available in the tablet form is used to manage the various problems like dyspepsia, indigestion, gastro-enteritis etc. It helps to balance vata and pitta doshas. Calmative action of this medicine is quite good in the problem of dyspepsia. It helps to provide relief in heart burn. It supports the good health of digestive system and also improves the digestion process. Sanjivani vati is quite good medicine for chronic fever as well. This medicine helps to boost up immune system and protects the body from various infections. It is well indicated in fever as well.

Benefits of Sanjivani Vati
Dyspepsia
Indigestion
Snake bite
Chronic fever
Worm infestation
Cough & cold
Headache
Dosage
1 tablet once or twice a day to treat digestive problems.
2 tablets once or twice a day to treat gastro enteritis
3 tablets once or twice a day to treat snake bite.
4 tablets once or twice a day to treat chronic fever.
It is traditionally advised along with fresh ginger juice and water.

Contraindications
Over dosage may cause burning sensation in stomach and poisonous effects.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Store in cool dry place.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


114. Eladi Rasayanam
Reference – Ashtanga Hridayam Chikitsa 5/ 28-32
Abstract
Rasayana (natural rejuvenator) emphasis on prevention and maintenance of health and balanced life. Different types of formulations are explained in Ayurveda such as vati, ghrita, taila and rasayana for various purposes. Eladi Rasayana is described in texts which deals with numerous diseases like cold, cough, abdominal discomfort, memory loss like conditions. Overall it maintains and promotes healthy living. So in this article we will discuss Eladi rasayana ingredients, method of preparation, benefits and dosage.

Introduction
Eladi Rasayana is classical preparation in Ayurveda texts, rich in various nutrients which elongates life span. Rasayana is devoted to longevity, youth, intelligence, and strengthening sense organs. As the name suggests Eladi Rasayana, Ela (Cardamom) is its primary ingredient which is calming, aromatic in nature. It is beneficial in managing diabetes, abdominal tumors, anemia, etc. conditions. It helps in boosting intelligence, memory, rejuvenating and keeps overall healthy if daily consumed. Rasayana imparts superior rasa, dhatu to the body and acts as a defense mechanism.

Classical Indication
According to classical texts, Eladi Rasayana is explained by Acharya Vagbhata in Rajakshma adhyaya. It has Rasayana property which means rejuvenating also known as Eladi sarpiguda rasayana. The various classical indications are mentioned below-

Medya (improve intelligence)
Chakshusha (good for eyes)
Aayushya (longevity) 
Deepan (improves digestive fire)
Prameh (diabetes)
Gulma (tumorous growth)
Kshaya roga (tuberculosis)
Pandu roga (anaemia)
Bhagandra (fistula)
Ingredients
The ingredients of Eladi Rasayanam are listed below-

Kshaya Dravya (Decoction Material) – Each 9 Paal (384g)
Ela (Elettaria cardamomum)
Ajmoda (Trachyspermium ammi)
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis)
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)
Bibhitaki (Terminaliabellerica)
Hingu (Ferula assafoetida)
Shunthi (Zingiber officinalis)
Marich (Piper nigrum)
Pippali (Piper longum)
Chital (Plumbago zeylanica)
Nimba (Azardica indica)
Khadira (Acacia catechu)
Shaal (Shorea robusta)
Asana (Pterocarpus marsupium)
Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium)
Vidanga (Emblica ribes)
Prakshep Dravya (Powdered Drugs)
Tugakshiri (Maranta arundinacea- 6 paal- 288g)
Twak (Cinnamomum zeylenicum- 1 paal- 48 grams) 
Ela (Elettaria cardamomum- 1 paal- 48 grams)
Patara (Cinnamomum tamala- 1 paal- 48 grams)
Madhura Dravya (Sweetening Agent)
Sita (Saccharum officinarum)- 30 paal / 1.45grams
Madhu (Honey)- 2 prastha / 1.50kg
Ghrita (Cow’s ghee)- 1 prastha / 768 grams
Benefits Of Ingredients
Ela- It is very helpful in respiratory disorders and digestive dysfunctioning. It reduces inflammation and is a good source of oxidants. It is helpful in weight loss, bad breath and antimicrobial activity.           
Ajmoda- It is best for managing gastrointestinal conditions like indigestion, bloating, flatulence, abdominal cramps. It has great healing properties and balances kapha dosha.       
Amalaki- It has rejuvenating properties with a rich source of antioxidants, Vitamin C. It strengthens the immune system and digestion. It improves liver, lungs, and brain functioning.    
Haritaki- It has wound healing properties, regulates cough, constipation and indigestion. It improves digestion, gut health and regulates metabolism. It makes skin very healthy.   
Bibhitaki- It is beneficial in loss of appetite, cough, eye and hair related issues. It is effective in purgation, piles and worm infestations. It relaxes the central nervous system.
Hingu- It aids digestion, relieves bloating, abdominal pain, it prevents microbes and stomach infections. It manages bronchitis, kidney stones and hair related issues.
Shunthi- It is used as antioxidants, prevents headache, stomach disorders, and cough. It reduces pain, inflammation and skin related issues. It also aids in digestion. 
Marich- It relieves bloating, abdominal pain, cough, asthma, congestion. It protects the liver and kidney, their functioning. It is hot in potency and aids digestion.
Pippali- It has anti-inflammatory, analgesic and anti-microbial effects. It manages colds, coughs, clears mucus and reduces intestinal functions. It prevents muscular pain and removes toxins.
Chitrak- It is used to manage jaundice, urinary calculus, skin diseases and abscess formation. It is used as antiseptic and anti-helminthic. It improves gut health and indigestion.  
Nimba- It eliminates parasites from skin and intestines. It reduces fever and urinary tract infections. It is very helpful in wound healing and worm infestations. 
Khadira- It controls bleeding from gums or piles and due to its cold potency is very useful in skin conditions like allergies, itching, rashes, dermatitis, urticaria, etc.
Shaal- It relieves pain and various infections. It reduces pain, swelling and inflammation. It treats leprosy, wounds, ulcers and helps in healing wounds, boils, diabetic wounds.
Asana- It balances kapha, pitta dosha and skin related infections. It has antidiabetic action and is rich in essential nutrients to boost blood circulation.
Bhallataka- It is useful in common colds, coughs, asthma and respiratory disorders. It acts as anti-allergic, analgesics and anti-inflammatory.
Vidanga- It manages worm infestations, vomiting, indigestion, and flatulence due to its hot potency. It is also useful in constipation, removing toxins from blood and skin diseases. 
Tugakshiri- It enhances immunity, manages ulcers, diabetic wounds like conditions. It is effective in constipation and excessive urination.  
Twak- It relieves vomiting and acts as digestive stimulant. It is beneficial for cold, cough and tuberculosis like disorders. It enhances skin health and acts as antiseptic.         
Patara- It manages bad odor from mouth, black spots on face, dental caries, any type of swelling. It regulates intestinal system, brain functioning and immunity.         
Sita- It contains various nutrients, vitamins and amino acids. It balances the pH of the stomach and secretes digestive juices. It calms pitta and is a rich source of calcium, iron and magnesium.         
Madhu- It is a rich source of antioxidants, heals wounds, helps in digestion and soothes sore throat. It is useful in stress, anxiety and depression also.  
Cow’s ghee- It is a rich source of vitamins, ensuring cellular functioning and body growth. It boosts immunity, memory, eye sight, bones and muscles.
Method Of Preparation
The steps for preparation of Eladi Rasayan are given as following-

Firstly, collect all the drugs mentioned above and wash them properly.
Then prepare kwath (decoction) from the kwath dravya into 16 times water, reduced to one eighth in a clean stainless steel vessel.
Add cow’s Ghrit to the decoction prepared and cook it on mild heat.
After Paka Lakshana filters the solution obtained and adds all Prakshepa dravyas (powdered drugs) to the solution obtained.
At last mix the solution properly and filter it once again.
Now Eladi Rasayana is obtained, stored in a clean airtight glass container, away from direct sunlight.
Properties
The properties of Eladi rasayana are as given below-

It acts on the respiratory system.
It has a great effect on the digestive system.
It provides strength to body tissues. 
It has anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties.
It acts against all microorganisms.
Indications
The indications of Eladi Rasayana are as follows-

Cough
Breathlessness
Phthisis
Anemia
Emaciation
Memory loss
Anorexia 
Improves vision, intellect
Digestive disorders
Contraindications
No such conditions are mentioned when this formulation is not given. 
During lactation or pregnancy should consult the physician. 
Overdose or improper administration may cause gastric irritations.
Dosage / Usage
10-15 grams once or twice a day after meals.

Anupana
With milk or water.

Taste
Katu (Pungent), Madhura (Sweet).

Smell
Like Ghee

Conclusion
Above mentioned Eladi Rasayanam is a herbal preparation having properties of Rasayana like longevity, rejuvenating, intelligence, memory, etc. Overall it improves intellect, vision, digestion and keeps healthy. This formulation is found in the consistency of jam like and made of all herbal medicines. So for any above described indications Eladi rasayana is used if any concern you may consult to the physician.


115. Guduchi Satva
Reference: Yogaratnakara Rajayakshma Chikitsa 1/11
Introduction
Guduchi Satva is a classical formulation that keeps the Vata and Pitta Dosha in balance. It is prepared using the stem part of plant called Indian Tinospora used in Ayurvedic treatment for burning sensation of feet, bleeding diseases etc. It is also known as Giloy Sat, Amrita Satva and Giloy Satwa.

Ingredients
Guduchi (Indian Tinospora) (Tinospora cordifolia) – Stem – 50 grams
Water – 200 ml
Method of Preparation
Giloy stems are cut into small pieces around 2 to 3 inch length and its outer husk is removed in case needed. Then this is crushed and soaked in water. 5-6 times. Its small crushed pieces are softened well in the water using hands. This results in release of starchy material of Guduchi into the water.

Then its fibrous and woody parts are detached from the vessel and the liquid is kept untouched, allowing the starchy particles to settle down at the bottom.

The water that gets stable above is cautiously transferred out without disturbing the starch sediment. Then the starch sediment is washed with slight amount of water and completely dried in shade and collected.

It is stockpiled in moist and air-tight glass containers. A white powder is obtained which is finally around 5% of the original quantity of the herb.

Medicinal Properties
Guduchi Satva is an efficient Ayurvedic formulation that keeps the Vata and Pitta balanced, possessing detox, anti-inflammatory, hematogenic (helps in formation of red blood cells) anti-gout, immunomodulator, blood purifier, antioxidant, carminative etc. properties that help in managing various conditions of the body.

It being immunomodulator improves the immunity of the body that enhances the body defense system to fight against infections. It can lessen body aches.

This Ayurvedic medicine is very useful in lowering body temperature chronic fever, viral fever, and malarial fever, due to its anti-pyretic effect and also reduces burning sensation in fever.

It provides relief from burning sensation of feet and benefits in gout troubles also.

It is even helpful in managing bleeding diseases etc., as in case of nasal bleeding, bleeding per rectum, menorrhagia, Pthisis, emaciation, improve the body strength.

It is beneficial in improving liver functions, can manage the jaundice in a patient.

It has ability to provide relief from acidity, improves digestion and reduces inflammation in gastritis, heal the mouth ulcer. It relieves the condition of excessive thirst.

Dosage
Consume about 500 mg to 1 g 1-2 times per day, before or after having meals, or as recommended by Ayurvedic doctor.

Therapeutic Uses
Efficient Ayurvedic treatment in relieving burning sensation in feet.
Treat nasal bleeding, bleeding per rectum, menorrhagia, Pthisis, emaciation etc.
A good immunity booster
Giloy Satva improves liver functions.
A very useful treatment of fever and gout.
It can cure acidity, gastritis, mouth ulcer, excessive thirst.
Also effective in urinary disorders, Anemia and treats Jaundice.
Contraindications / Side Effects
Diabetic patients must regularly keep a check on their blood sugar levels while having this medicine.
Keep it away from sight and reach of children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


116. Abhraka Panchamruta Rasa – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Introduction
Abhraka Panchamruta Rasa is an ayurvedic formulation. This formulation is formulated from the mixture of mineral and herbs.

Ingredients
One of the main ingredient of this formulation is abhraka bhsama. This bhasma is mainly prepared from black mica or biotite. This bhasma is also known with other names such as mica ash, calcined mica, oxidized mica, abhrak calx or calcined biotite.

Other Ingredients:-
Abhraka Panchamruta Rasa contains
Rasa (purified Mercury), Abhraka bhasma and many more vata pacifying herbs used for curing brain and muscle diseases.

Method of Preparation
First of all kajjali is prepared then abhrak bhasma and herbal powders are added to make small pills of 125 mg.

Properties
This Abhrak bhasma is enriched with elements like magnesium, potassium, iron, plant alkaloids, calcium and alumininum etc. This bhasma is known to contain properties like anti-inflammatory, energy booster, immunomodulator, anti-depressent, nervine stimulant and many more.

Indications
Neuritis
Neuralgia
Muscular pains
Myalgia
Dose
125 to 250 mg, one to two times a day, before or after meal.

Contraindications
Take precautions if suffering from high BP, blood sugar and in pregnancy case.
Gastritis will be there due to over dose.
Take the medicine under doctor’s prescription.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


117. Agnisandeepan Rasa
Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali Agnimandya rogadhikaar 10/ 132-139
Introduction
Agnisandeepan rasa is a Classical Ayurvedic preparation that consists of a mixture of herbs and minerals. This is known to consist of many ingredients. The herbs present in this formulation are having great role in treating various digestion related disorders including low digestive power, indigestion, GERD, heartburn, pain in abdomen and various inflammations in abdominal region etc.

Ingredients
Maricha Churna (Powder of Piper nigrum): It improves the function of digestive power. It has pungent taste and stimulates digestive fire. This also stimulates appetite.
Pippali Churna: It promotes digestive fire and has rejuvenating property. It pacifies Vata and Kapha. It is effective in indigestion, diarrhea, gastric problems and stomach pain, liver and spleen problems.
Haritaki Churna (Powder of Terminilia chebula): It promotes digestion and improves strength. It is effective in indigestion, liver and spleen problems etc.
Shunti Churna (Powder of Zingiber officinalis) – 1 Part: This is very effective in digestive problems. It pacifies Vata and kapha dosha. It is helpful in bloating, diarrhea and abdominal pain.
Other Ingredients Are:
Pippalimool Churna (Powder of roots of Piper longum) – 1 Part
Chavya Churna (Powder of Piper retrofractum) – 1 Part
Chitrak Churna (Powder of Plumbago zeylanica) – 1 Part
Panchlavan (Five types of salts including Saindhav, vid, aoudhvidh, samudra and souvarchallavan) – 1 Part each
Chitrakmool Churna (Powder of roots of Plumbago zeylanica) – 1 Part
Yavakshaar Churna (Alkaline extract obtained from Barley) – 1 Part
Sajjikshar Churna (Alkaline extract obtained from plant grown in sodium rich soil) – 1 Part
Sudh tankan (Purified borax) – 1 part
Shvet Jeera Churna (Powder of Cuminum cyminum) – 1 Part
Syaahjeera Churna (Powder of Nigella sativa) – 1 part
Ajvayan Churna (Powder of Trachyspermum ammi) – 1 Part
Vacha Churna (Powder of Acorus calamus) – 1 Part
Sounf Churna (Powder of Foeniculum vulgare) – 1 Part
Ghrit Bharjithing (Purified form of Ferula asafoetida) – 1 Part
Jaayphal Churna (Powder of Myristica fragrans) – 1 Part
Kuth Churna (Powder of Saussurea costus) – 1 Part
Jaatipatri Churna (Powdered extract of leaves of Myristica fragrans) – 1 Part
Chotiilaychi Churna (Powder of Cardamom) – 1 Part
Twak Churna (Powder of Cinnamon) – 1 Part
Imlitwakkshar Churna (Alkaline extract obtained from bark of tamarind) – 1 Part
Apamarg Kshar (Alkaline extracts obtained from Achyranthes aspera) – 1 Part
Sudh Vatsnabh Churna (Powdered extract obtained from Aconitum ferox) – 1 Part
Sudh Parad (Purified form of mercury) – 1 Part
Sudh Gandhak Churna (Powdered extract of purified form of Sulphur) – 1 Part
Loh Bhasam (Purified ash of Iron) – 1 Part
Abhrak Bhasam (Purified ash of Asbestos) – 1 Part
Vang Bhasam (Purified ash of Tin) – 1 Part
Lavang Churna (Clove Powder) – 1 Part
Amalvetas (Powder of Gracinia penduculata) – 2 Parts
Sankh Bhasam (Conch shell’s purified ash) – 4 Parts
Method of Preparation
First of all mix parad & gandhak in a homogenous way and make a kajjali.
Add the three bhasma of abhrak, loh & vang and then again mix it.
Then add all the powdered extracts of herbs mentioned above and mix it with the use of decoction of panchkol for 3 days.
Again use decoction of chitrakmool, apamarg and give 3-3 good mix and finally give 21 times mixture with leaf extract of nimba (Azadirecta indica) until a thick paste is obtained, then make 1-1 grams tablets from it & dry them in shady area.
Medicinal Properties
The various alkali extracts in it have the power to stimulate the digestive secretions thus enhancing the urge to take food and also aids in the digestion. Also the herbal medicine and also the bhavnadravya included consist of Panchkol dravyas which is a combination of five herbs (Pippali, Pippalimool, Chavya, Chitrak and Sonth) having ushan veerya which due to the effect of their hot potency help in reducing pain & swelling in abdominal region. Also these drugs are the best appetizer & helps in promoting the digestion by treating mandagni. And the suksham gun (quality to be absorbed quickly in the bodily tissues up to cellular level) of the bhasmas (purified ash) of iron, asbestos and tin will facilitate in promoting immunity & by maintaining the strength reduced in bodily tissues as a result of mandagni.

Indications
Mandagni (Decreased digestive power)
Ajeerna (Indigestion)
Amalpit (Gastro Esophageal Reflex disorders)
Shool (Abdominal pain)
Gulm (Abdominal swelling e.g. tumors)
Dose
One tablet twice daily with Lukewarm water.

Cautions
Take under medical supervision.
Don’t use medicine in overdose.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


118. Akik Bhasma
Introduction
Akik bhasma is a fine powdered Ayurvedic medicine which is prepared from a natural mineral named as agate (mineral of silica) gem or akika. It is found in different colors such as white, blue, red and yellow. Mostly White color is used for the preparation of remedies. It provides energy and natural minerals to body. It is used in the treatment of heart diseases like hypertension, digestive disorders like diarrhea and liver disorders. It also helps in the rejuvenation of the cells for effective functioning. This mineral stone also possess healing and soothing properties.

Ingredients
Shudh (purified) Akik or processed agate
Rose water
Aloe vera (Aloe barbadensis)
Method Of Preparation
Purified akik or agate is crushed with aloe vera juice and other herbal juices. Then it is exposed to heat at 300 degree Celsius temperature for 1 – 2 hours, allowed to self-cooling and grind into very fine powder. It is known as Akik bhasma.

Dosage
125mg – 250 mg twice a day.

Indications
It act as cardiac tonic and useful in heart disease like hypertension and also strengthens the heart muscles.
It helps to balance the pitta doshas and their related disorders.
It is used in mental depression.
It is useful in excessive uterine bleeding.
It good for eyes and helps in conjunctivitis and reduces burning sensation in eyes.
It helps in treatment of digestive disorders like diarrhea, acidity, flatulence, constipation, heart burn and vomiting.
It promotes the healing process and have soothing properties.
It provides essential nutrients to the body and assures good health.
It has rejuvenation property and rejuvenates all parts of the body.
Contradictions
It is avoided in case of tuberculosis, asthma, and productive cough and wheezing.
It should be taken under medical supervision during breastfeeding and asthma.
Sometimes its long time unsupervised use may cause kidney stones.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


119. Mukta Pishti
Reference – Ayurveda Sara Sangraha, Shodhana marana prakarana.
Introduction
Mukta Pishti is an ayurvedic formulation. This formulation is prepared from the pearls. Pearls have been known for its healing properties from centuries. This is enriched with properties such as anti-hypertensive, anti-inflammatory, antacid, anti-mutagenic, adaptogenic, antioxidant, anti-stress, antidepressant and many more.

Ingredients
Shuddha Mukta – Purified Pearl
Rose water – in quantity sufficient
Method of preparation
Took the purified pearl up to 10 grams.
Powdered the pearl and grounded with rose water for three to four days.
As this mixture became as fine as collyrium, pishti is ready.
Dose
125 to 250 mg, one to two times a day, before or after meals, along with butter, honey or milk.

Indications
Psychosis
Anxiety
Depression
Anti-hypertensive
Cardiac toner
Mania
Diarrhea with bleeding
Gastritis
Menopause
Premenstural syndrome
Excessive uterine bleeding
Excessive burning sensations
Fever
Psychological diseases like short temper, tinnitus, phobias and severe mental shock etc.
Contraindications
Problem of lower blood pressure due to over dose.
Take the medicine under doctor’s prescription.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


120. Praval Pishti (Coral Calcium)
Reference: Ayurveda Sara Sangraha, Shodhana marana prakarana page: 119, AFI Vol. 1.
Praval Pishti is an Ayurvedic medicine which is prepared from Coral. Praval is the name given to coral in Hindi and in Ayurveda. However, coral calcium powder is not used directly in Ayurveda. Coral calcium powder is processed with edible rose water and ground to make a micro-fine powder. The coral calcium powder processed with rose water is known as Praval Pishti. It is used in Ayurvedic treatment of various health complications like cough, cold, Pitta related diseases etc. It should only be taken strictly under medical supervision.

Ingredients
Shuddha Pravala – Purified Coral
Rose water – quantity sufficient.
How to Make?
Take purified Coral and it is pounded to powder form then it is thoroughly ground with rose water for 3 – 4 days, till it becomes as fine as collyrium and finally to obtain Pishti.

Dosage
125 mg – 250 mg once or twice a day before or after food along with honey, butter or ghee or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Indications
Praval Pishti (Coral calcium) is helpful in following health conditions:
Bleeding disorders
Calcium deficiency
General debility
Headache
Burning sensation
Acidity
Ulcers
Ulcerative colitis
Jaundice
Hepatitis
Vomiting
Conjunctivitis
Fever
Depression
Anxiety with restlessness and worrying
Heart Palpitation
Tachycardia
Non-productive cough
Asthma with difficulty in coughing up sputum
Osteoarthritis
Osteoporosis
Low bone mineral density
Premature greying of hair
Hair fall
Sunburn
Post-Menopausal Osteoporosis Prevention
Painful periods (especially membranous dysmenorrhea)
Breast tenderness
Oligospermia (if person is also suffering with acidity and heat sensation)
Side Effects
There are no known side effects. It is best to use under medical supervision.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


121. Manasamitra Vatakam – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Sahasrayogam Gutika Prakarana 68.
Introduction
Manasamitra Vatika is an ayurvedic formulation that is prepared from very effective herbs. This herbal formulation is very efficient to treat the mental illness and disorders.

Ingredients
Bala (Sida cordifolia)
Nagbala (Grewia hirsuta)
Bilwa (Aegle marmelos)
Prisniparni (Uraria picta)
Pravala
Sankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis)
Kukundara (Blumea lacera)
Swarna
Pushkarmoola (Inula racemosa)
Mrigasringa
Vacha (Acorus calamus)
Swarnamakshika
Shweta chandan (Santalum album)
Rakta chandan (Pterocarpus santalinus)
Mouktika (Mukta pishti)
Loha bhasma
Madhuka twak (Madhuca indica)
Pippali (Piper longum)
Karpura (Cinnamomum camphora)
Elavaluka (Elettaria cardamomum)
Indrayana vishesha (Citrullus colocynthis)
Ratanjyoti (Alkanna tinctoria)
Nirgundi (Vitex negundo)
Mustha (Cyprus rotundus)
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata)
Rajata (Rajat bhasma)
Shilajatu (Asphaltum)
Gojihwa (Onosma bracteatum)
Padmakesara (Nelumbo nucifera)
Jivaka (Malaxis acuminata)
Rishabhaka (Microstylis muscifera)
Kakoli (Roscoea procera)
Brihati (Solanum indicum)
Gorakhmundi (Sphaeranthus indicus)
Bhunimba (Andrographis paniculata)
Aragwadha (Cassia fistula)
Parushaka (Grewia asiatica)
Phalatraya (Gentiana kurroo juice)
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia)
Gopika Dwandwa (2 types of sariba) (Hemidesmus indicus), (Cryptolepis buchanani)
Jivanthi (Leptadenia reticulata)
Somavalli (Ephedra gerardiana)
Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera)
Haridra (Curcuma longa)
Usira (Vetiveria zizanioides)
Draksha (Vitis vinifera)
Yashtyahwa (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Riddhi (Habenaria edgeworthii)
Vriddhi (Habenaria intermedia)
Durva (Cynodon dactylon)
Hamsapadi (Adiantum philippense)
Katphala (Myrica esculenta)
Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticum)
Tulasi dala (Ocimum sanctum)
Kasturi (Deer musk)
Keasara (Crocus sativus)
Method of Preparation
Take all the ingredients up to 10 grams.
Powder all the ingredients individually and mix all together later.
Triturate this powder mixture with the liquids (the juice and water decoction) and make its paste.
Make the pills from this paste.
Medicinal Properties
Manasamitra Vatakam is an effective Ayurvedic formulation that helps to keep the Vata, Pitta and Kapha dosha balanced, potent in Neuro Protective, Anti-Stress, Anxiolytic, Anti-Depressant Anti-Inflammatory and Antioxidant etc properties.

It is very useful Ayurvedic medicine for psychiatric conditions, improves blood circulation and oxygen supply to brain cells thereby helps to expand intelligence, improve brain functions, enhance memory and concentration as well as boost retention power. It is helpful in depression too, promotes calmness and feeling of peace in the mind. This herbal preparation is even useful to decreases anxiety and prevent repeated occurrences of anxiety disorders. It lessens the feeling of restlessness, tiredness, and nervousness. Manasamitra Vatika is beneficial in epilepsy, seizures and mania, reducing their frequency of occurrence. It is beneficial in insomnia too, helps to induce sleep, calms the mind, improves the quality of sleep and lessens the sleep disturbances.

It is even useful in Alzheimer’s disease and Schizophrenia. This Vatika is suitable in improving speech problems. It is even useful in children for diseases like autism and also helpful in poisonous condition.

Indications
Mental illness
To enhance memory
Depression
Psychosis
GAD (generalized anxiety disorder)
Epilepsy
Seizures
Stress buster
Improves concentration
Pre-menstrual tension
Insomnia
Migraine
Alzheimer’s disease
Dose
Two tablets two times a day, before or after meals.

Contraindications
Always take under supervision of medical practitioner.
Over dose can cause burning sensations.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


122. Godanti Bhasma – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Rasa Tarangini 11/241
Introduction
Godanti Bhasma is an Ayurvedic medicine, prepared from Gypsum. It is used in Ayurvedic treatment of headache, Chronic Fever, leucorrhea etc. This medicine should only be taken strictly under medical supervision. It is found in white color and appears like the teeth (danta) of the cow, when a stroke is given over the plaques of Gypsum.

Chemically it is known as ‘Dihydrate of Calcium sulphate’. Its Chemical formula is CaSO4. 2H2O. Plaster of Paris is a product prepared from it.

Purification of Godanti or Godanti Shodhana
Take Good quality of Godanti and tied in a cloth and make a bundle. It is swinged in a pot (dolayantra) and subjected for Swedana (sudation) in the media of fresh juice of lemon or leaf juice of Leuacas cephalotus – Dronapushpi Patra swarasa, for a period of one and a half hour.

Preparation of Godanti Bhasma
It involves following steps:
Purification of Gypsum
Grinding and pulverizing to make fine powder of gypsum
Grinding and triturating of powder with aloe vera juice
Make small and thin cakes
Heating and calcining of thin cakes at high temperature around 200-500° C.
Ingredient of Godanti Bhasma
Shuddha Godanti – Purified Gypsum – 100 g.

Method of Preparation
Purified Gypsum is triturated with aloe vera juice or lemon juice, thin cakes are prepared and heated in a closed container under 200 – 500° C to obtain Godanti Bhasma.

Incineration – Godanti Marana
Purified plaques of Godanti are pounded and placed in between the earthen discs (plates). After proper sealing, it is subjected to heat, by using cow dung cakes. It can be kept over the gas stove as it needs moderate heat (150– 250 C) for 1- 2 hour. When it is cooled, white colour powder is collected. This triturated well and stored. If the bhasma has not attained the fineness, once again it is subjected to heat.

Dosage
General Dose: 125 to 375 mg

Dose based on age:-
1 – 5 years – 100 – 250 mg, in divided doses per day.
5- 16 years – 250 – 500 mg, in divided doses per day.
Adults – 250mg – 1 gram in divided doses per day.
It can be consumed along with ghee, honey milk or with sugar.

Indications
Godanti bhasma plays crucial role in Ayurvedic practice and it is useful in various health complications which are given below:

It is very effective in chronic fever, typhoid fever.
It reduces headache and it is beneficial in migraine and trigeminal neuralgia.
It is useful in leucorrhea and it reduces white discharge and inflammation of women reproductive organs.
It is useful in Menorrhagia (heavy bleeding) during menstruation.
It act as calcium supplement and helps in calcium deficiency disorders like osteoporosis, backache, and rickets.
It is used to treat gastric problems like gastric ulcers, diarrhea, dysentery and hyperacidity.
It is also useful in burning sensation.
Side Effects
There are no side effects of Godanti bhasma for short term uses. Its long term use may cause liver dysfunction.

Contraindications
Godanti Bhasma is contraindicated in liver disorders and hypercalcemia.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


123. Jahara Mohara Bhasma – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Siddha Yoga Sangraha, Jwaradhikara
Introduction
Jahar Mohra Bhasma is an ayurvedic mineral-based formulation. It is prepared from the Jahar Mohra Stone, which is also called Serpentine. However, Serpentine is not a single mineral, but it mainly contains Magnesium Silicate. It is mainly used in the treatment of heart diseases, cough, heart burn, etc.

Process of Formation of Jahar Mohra Bhasma
It involves following steps:
Purification or Detoxification (Shodhana)
Grinding the fine powder Cow’s Milk for 6 hours (Mardana)
Making cakes
Drying the small cakes (Marna)
Ingredients
Shuddha Jahar Mohra (Purified Serpentine) is the main ingredient of Jahar mohara bhasmas.
The other ingredients are silicates of iron, magnesium, aluminum, zinc and manganese.
How to Make?
Purification of jahar mohara
Take good quality Jahar Mohra (Serpentine) stones and heat until they become red and then throwing them into Cow’s milk. This process is repeated for 21 times.

Preparation
Purified Jahar mohara stones and grind with cow’s milk for 6 hours to make a paste. Then make small cakes of this paste and after that drying these small cakes, they are put into the earthen pots and heat for obtaining Bhasma.

Dosage & Administration
Infants – 30 to 125 mg
Children – 60 to 125 mg
Adults – 125 to 250 mg
Geriatric (Old age) – 125 to 250 mg
It can be taken twice a day with Honey or water.

In Pregnancy – Best To Avoid
Indications
Jahar Mohra is beneficial in diseases of digestive system and cardiovascular system.

Here are some of important medicinal uses and benefits of jahar mohara:-
Menorrhagia – Menorrhagia is abnormal heavy menstruation. Many women experience weakness and fatigue. Anemia may also present in women with heavy menstruation. Jahar Mohra provides support to reduce bleeding, weakness and fatigue along with other medicines.
High Blood Pressure – Jahar Mohra Pishti is frequently used for managing high blood pressure. Its antihypertensive properties are more visible in dosage more than one gram per day.
Digestive problems – It is useful in various digestive problems like diarrhea, acidity. It has different properties like Antidiarrheal, Antiemetic, Antacid and Digestive Stimulant.
Antidote – It act as antidote for snake bite and scorpion stings.
It also has Antibacterial and Antimicrobial properties.
It is used to reduce the fever (Febrifuge).
It acts as cardiac tonic, Pitta related disorders, heart burn, headache and gastro enteritis.
It is coolant in nature.
Side Effects
Usually it is safe below the dose of 500 mg but it is best to take this medicine only under medical supervision, especially for children, pregnant and lactating mothers.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


124. Kapardak Bhasma
Reference – Ras Ratna Samuchaya
Abstract
In present times, fast food is the food of choice for everyone. But we all know that it is the least nutrient giving food. Still we all like it the most? Aren’t you? Yes, right! But It causes lots of abdominal diseases, so to manage these disorders what should we do? Don’t worry! Ayurveda is here to help you. Today we are going to discuss one of the wonderful formulations indicated in abdominal issues i.e. Kapardak bhasma and its numerous health benefits which are mentioned in classical texts.

Introduction
Kapardak bhasma is also known as kapardika bhasma, cowrie bhasma, Kaudi bhasma, varatika bhasma. It is an ayurvedic calcined preparation mainly used in managing disorders of the digestive tract. Kapardak bhasma has hot potency but it has an alkaline effect in the stomach. Thus it stops the excess secretion of HCL.

Classical Indication
Grahani (Malabsorption syndrome)

Ingredients
Kapardak (Yellow coloured)
Description Of The Ingredients
Kaparda (Calcium carbonate) – It is mainly a calcium carbonate compound which helps in relieving pain, IBS, tuberculosis due to its katu (pungent), ushna (hot), digestive stimulant and aphrodisiac properties. It balances vata and kapha dosha and also aids in managing acid reflux and heartburn.
Method Of Preparation
Dig a hole on the ground of 1 hand length and thickness and put a pan of iron inside the hole.
Then put all the kaudi (varatika) on that iron pan and cover this with a tin sheet.
Now spread forest thorns all over the tin sheets and light the fire.
After 8 hours of burning just make it lukewarm.
Keep the ash aside and collect the varatika (white coloured)
Now do mardan (frolement) of varatika with nimbu swaras and prepare muffins.
Dry these muffins and burn it in gajputta by closing it in sharava samputta.
After 1 putt, bhasma will be ready.
Medicinal Properties
Kapardak bhasma has Katu (pungent) and tikta (bitter) rasa, Laghu (light), rooksha (dry) and theekshana guna (Sharp), ushna veerya (hot potency), Katu vipaka (Result after digestion) and mainly pacifies vata and kapha dosha but it has alkaline property due to which it prevents the excessive secretion of gastric acid and pacifies the amla guna of pitta thus helpful in reducing elevated pitta. It also alleviates ama from the body and supports healthy digestion. Let’s see some of its tremendous health benefits:-

Kapardak bhasma possess carminative and antiflatulent and vata shamak properties therefore useful in abdominal pain, bloating, intestinal gas, and excessive flatulence. It gives better results when given with cow’s ghee and mishri. Kapardika bhasma with arogyavardhini vati is very helpful in these cases.
It is very good in preventing belching as it reduces the production and accumulation of ama (endotoxins) dosha in the body. It also prevents the sour taste of the mouth by correcting digestion.
Kapardak bhasma with swarna makshik aids in inducing vomiting and expels the Sour vomitus and mucus content.
If Kapardak bhasma is given with Madhu then it shows wonders in ajeerna (indigestion). But in rasa ajeerna it is advised to be given with Hingwashtak churna.
In parinamshoola (Duodenal ulcer), it should be given with dadim swarasa and dadimavaleha and in Annadrav shoola (Gastric ulcers) it should be given with Shankh bhasma.
In grahani (Malabsorption syndrome), it is advised to take jeera churna.
In Agnimandya (low digestive fire) it is given with trikatu churna.
In Shwas roga (Dyspnoea), it is given with pippali churna and madhu. 
In karna strava (CSOM (Chronic suppurative otitis media)), it should be poured in the ear and afterwards add nimbu swaras.
In dry cough, it is advised to take it with malai or pan swaras.
In Kshaya roga it should be given with makhan.
Dosage
3gm -6 mg once or twice a day or as directed by the physician.

Anupana (adjuvant)
Cow’s ghee, Mishri or as according to the disease.

Contraindications
Store it in a cool and dry place
Keep it away from the children
Avoid giving in pregnancy or lactation
Always take after consulting an Ayurvedic physician
Conclusion
Therefore, coming to an end, we can say kapardak bhasma is beneficial in managing Various health disorders if given with proper adjuvant and in proper doses. This medicine works well if we follow the diet properly and adapt to a healthy lifestyle. For more queries you can consult online on herbalremedies123@yahoo.com.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


125. Mandur (Mandoor) Bhasma
Reference: Rasatarangini
INTRODUCTION
This herbal mineral formulation known as Mandoor/ Mandur Bhasma is made from calcined iron. When iron keeps lying under the surface of earth for years, it starts rusting which is chemically known as Ferric Oxide. According to Ayurveda 80- 100 years old is considered to be supreme. This ferric oxide is purified and crushed to form Mandoor Bhasma. It is a little less potent than Loha Bhasma. But, as it is made from ferric oxide, it helps in curing anemia, liver and spleen disorders. It has potent hematinic, hematogenic, anthelmintic, fat burning and carminative properties.

INGREDIENTS
Ferric oxide
Cow’s urine
Aloe Vera juice
Triphala [Powdered Myrobalans] concoction
METHOD OF PREPARATION
Finely powdered Ferric Oxide and Myrobalans decoction is taken in the ratio 1:4 respectively and mixed. Put this mixture over the flame and boil it till the entire water content evaporates and only the powder is remaining. Later, mix the remaining powder and grind it with Aloe Vera juice and Cow’s urine and let it dry. When it dries out completely, heat it under high temperature and repeat this process for a few more times to get superior quality Mandoor Bhasma.

DOSAGE
Children- 20- 50 mg, twice every day after meals.

Adults – 250 – 500 mg, twice every day after meals.

It can be taken with trikatu [Long pepper, black pepper and dried ginger] with honey.

It can be taken with cow’s urine in constipation.

Kids should be given this medicine with honey.

INDICATIONS
Hepatomegaly and Splenomegaly
Jaundice
Anemia
Dysmenorrhea
Metrorrhagia
Amenorrhea
Anorexia
Generalized weakness
Rickets
Fever
Irritable Bowel Syndrome
Digestive disorders
Neuralgia
CONTRAINDICATIONS
Over dosage might show poisonous effects.
If the formulation is not properly made, it might cause toxic effects like weird taste of mouth, dark stools.
There are no known side effects if it is taken in the mentioned dosage under strict medical supervision.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


126. Kamdudha Ras – Ek Vishishtha Adhyana
Abstract
Kamdudha ras is an ayurvedic rasa aushadhi (mineral formulation) mentioned in classical texts. It is commonly indicated in pittaja and raktaja roga. The main reference of kamdudha ras is amlapitta but along with that it is also indicated in most of the pittaja and raktja roga. It possess several properties like sheeta (cold potency), rakta prasaadak (purifies blood), hridya (promotes heart health), pitta shamaka (pacifies pitta), dhatu vardhak (nourishes body tissues), balya (promotes strength). In this article we are going to share all the reviews about kamdudha ras from its preparation to indication and application in different diseases.

Introduction
In this present era people are magnetting toward ayurvedic medications on seeing the effectiveness and great results of herbal remedies. Ayurvedic formulations are of three types: mineral, herbal, and mixture of herbal and mineral. Kamdudha ras is one among Rasaushadhis (herbo-mineral) remedies. It is prepared in kharal (pestle and mortar). It mainly composed of mukta bhasma (calx of pearl), pravala bhasma (calx of coral), moonga (corallium rubrum), muktashukti bhasma (calx of oyster shell), varatika bhasma (calx of cowries shell), shankha bhasma (calx of conch shell), shuddha suvarna gairik (purified red ochre) and guduchi satva (Tinospora cordifolia). This is indicated in various health conditions such as amlapitta, vertigo, psychosis, bleeding disorders, emesis, nausea, heart diseases, renal disorders, insect bite, excessive menstrual bleeding. In further study we will discuss all about its preparation and health benefits in detail.

Kamdudha Ras – Ingredients, Preparation And Their Therapeutic Uses
According to ras yog sagar kamdudha ras preparation is of three types that are pratham kamdudha ras, dvitiya kamdudha ras and tritiya kamdudha ras and the most widely used is tritiya kamdudha ras. Let’s take a look at three different types of kamdudha ras and their health benefits.

Pratham Kamdudha Ras
It is prepared with suvarna gairik (Silicate of Alumina and Iron oxide) and amla swaras (Emblica officinalis). In this preparation swarna gairik is heated at a mild heat after that it is processed with amla swaras for 7 or 21 times then make it dry.

Uses of Pratham Kamdudha Ras – When given in a dose of 6 ratti (0.72 gm) with equal amount of shakkar (jaggery), ghee or honey promotes haemoglobin levels. Also cure number of pittaja roga along with prameha (Diabetes mellitus), pradara (Leucorrhoea), pandu (anaemia), kamla (jaundice), excessive burning sensation, excessive thirst and many other ptta-raktaja roga.

Dvitiya Kamdudha Ras
The ingredients used in this preparation are guduchi satva (Tinospora cordifolia), swarna gairik (Silicate of Alumina and Iron oxide) and abhrak bhasma (calx of mica). Make fine powder of all the ingredients and mix it well.

Uses of Dvitiya Kamdudha Ras – It is used in the dose of 0.5 gm. If it is given along with go dugdha (cow’s milk) and rabdi or rice water and rabdi then it is beneficial in pradara (Leucorrhoea). In pitta aggravation it can be given along with ghee and rabdi.

Tritya Kamdudha Ras
Tritya kamdudha ras is widely used and includes several ingredients like mukta bhasma (calx of pearl), praval bhasma (calx of coral), mukta shukti (pearl oyster), Kapardika (Cowrie shells), swarna gairik (Silicate of Alumina and Iron oxide), and guduchi satva (Tinospora cordifolia). Take all these ingredients in equal amounts and mix it well.

Uses of Tritiya Kamdudha Ras – Jeerna jwara (fever exists more than 15 days), bhrama (vertigo), amlapitta (hyperacidity), somaroga (excessive urination in women) and all the pittaja conditions.

How Kamdudha Ras Is Beneficial In Different Health Conditions?
Amlapitta
“Amlam ch pittam amla pittam” which means when pitta dosha becomes amliya then the condition is known as amlapitta. Amlapitta is correlated to hyperacidity. It is a lifestyle disorder mainly occurs due to increase in pitta dosha which occurs due to excessive consumption of amla (sour) food, excessive alcohol intake, heavy and slimy food that causes obstruction in food channels, over eating, food which takes time to digest and produce acid, eating over indigestion, suppression of natural urge. Amlapitta is of two types- urdavaga amlapitta in which kapha dosha is associated which includes symptoms like vomitus of yellow, green, black colour, acid eructations, heartburn, headache, anorexia, itching, fever, boils and rashes. Adhoga amlapitta is associated with pitta dosha and symptoms include fainting, burning sensation, polydipsia, confusion, delusion, nausea, indigestion, sweating, horripilation and yellow tinge of the body.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Amlapitta – The main ingredient that helps in curing amlapitta is sudha varga (kaparda, mukta shukti and many others mentioned above). It helps in curing amlapitta by its cold potency and lowering the levels of aggravated pitta in the body that is the main reason of amlapitta. It can be administered along with ghrita or amla swarasa and nagkesar churna.

Raktapitta
“Raktam ch pittam iti raktapittam” Raktapitta is considered as one of the bleeding disorders in which the vitiated pitta vitiates rakta dosha and which flows out of the body through any of the body’s orifices. The reason behind raktapitta is ushna ahara (hot potency food), kshara ahara (alkali food), lavna ahara (salty food), excessive sitting under sun, excessive walking, depression, anxiety, fear, eating milk along with salty food products. It is of three types on the basis of types- urdhva raktapitta which can cause symptoms like bleeding occurs from the upper orifices (mouth, eyes, nose and ears) and blood is oily, sticky, yellowish tinge and associated with kapha dosha. Second type is adhoga raktapitta and the symptoms that occur in adhoga raktapitta are associated with vata dosha and bleeding occurs from orifices of the lower body like anus, vagina and penis. And the third one is ubhya margi raktapitta in which symptoms of both urdhva and adhoga raktapitta are included.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Raktapitta – The effective ingredient for raktapitta is swarna gairik (Silicate of Alumina and Iron oxide) that possess rakta stambhak properties which in turn correct and subsides the raktapitta. For better effect it can be given with amla murabba or durva swarasa.

Hridroga
Hridroga includes a wide variety of cardiac diseases and among those diseases that are mentioned in Ayurvedic texts having brief explanations. Hridroga is of five types and pain dominating cardiac diseases are considered under Hridroga. The five types of hridroga are vataja, pittaja, kaphaja, tridodhaj and krimija hridya roga. The causes of these hrida roga are excessive exercise, excessive intake of bitter food, excessive purgations, excessive use of enemas, excessive thinking, fear, depression, secondary to untreatable disease, excessive vomiting, prolonged indigestion, suppression of natural urge, trauma, etc.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Hridroga – It is effective in pittaja type of hridroga. Sudha warga acts as the main ingredient in curing pittaja hridroga by its pitta pacifying properties which in turn reduces the burning sensation in the chest region.

Atisara
“Atisarnata saara atiara” which means excessive expulsion of  drava mala (watery stools) is known as atisara. Ati means excessive and saar means watery. As per modern it is correlated to diarrhoea and as per ayurvedic aspect its main cause is food heavy to digest, excessive oily food, excessive hot food, excessive liquid diet, excessive cold potency substance, indigestion, undercooked food, excessive water intake, excessive alcohol intake, fear, depression, suppression of natural urge like urination, defecation, etc, worm infestations, piles. Symptoms of atisara depends upon its types and its total types are 6 according to acharya charaka- vataja atisara includes watery stools of aruna varna (reddish colour), forty, dry and expel in less and small quantity through rectum frequent times. Pittaja atisara have pitta predominating symptoms like watery stool of yellow, blue, red, black in colour and smelly. Along with that, the patient feels daha (burning sensation in anal region), trishna (thirst), murcha (faintness), sarvanga daha (burning sensation in all body parts), excessive sweating, and fever. In kaphaja atisara patients have watery stools same as in pittaja atisara and along with that includes symptoms such as thirst, pain, burning in anal region. In sannipataja atisara tridoshas are involved and the symptoms that occur in this type of atisara include symptoms among above mentioned three types of atisara. Bhayaja and shokaja atisara both are having same types of symptoms like vataja atisara.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Atisara – It is mainly effective in pittaja atisara and the ingredient that is beneficial in pacifying pittaja atisara is sudha warga due to its pitta shamak (pacifies pitta) properties.

Mukhapaka
Mukha pakka is split into two words, mukha means mouth and paka means ulceration and the main reason for paka is pitta dosha elevation. The cause of mukhpaka is excessive intake of pitta predominating food, stress, anxiety and other conditions in which pitta dosha is aggravated like ulcerative colitis, crohn’s disease and even gastritis. Also some chemical irritants may lead to ulceration.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Mukhapaka – Mukhapaka is mainly cured by the mukta bhasma and praval bhasma present in kamdudha ras by its astringent, oleation, cold, pitta-vata pacifying properties.

Rakta Pradara
Also known as asrigdara- asriga means blood dara means excessive flow. It is considered as heavy bleeding during menstruation and the vitiated pitta and rakta dosha are responsible for that. Many factors are responsible for rakta pradara like dietary habits, lifestyle habits, mental stress and hormonal imbalance.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Rakta Pradara – As we discussed above that the main reason behind rakta pradara is vitiated pitta and rakta dosha so the main ingredient that is responsible for alleviating the symptoms of rakta pradara is swarna gairik bhasma (Silicate of Alumina and Iron oxide) that pacifies both pitta and rakta dosha and cures the problem of rakta pradara.

To buy Kamdudha Ras, please visit store.planetayurveda.com/products/kamdudha-ras

Conclusion
Kamdudha Ras is rasaushadhi (herbo-mineral ayurvedic formulation) that is very effective in various types of pittaj vyadhis. In this article we discuss the great facts about kamdudha ras. According to ras yog sagar Kamdudha ras is of three types that are pratham kamdudha ras, dvitiya kamdudha ras and tritiya kamdudha ras. Pratham kamdudha ras and Dvitiya kamdudha ras  have swarna gairik as an active ingredient and it possesses raktastambhaka and pitta pacifying properties that are responsible for curing certain health conditions like Leucorrhoea, anaemia, jaundice, excessive burning sensation. On the other hand Tritiya kamdudha ras includes sudha warga as an active ingredients which acts due to its cold potency and pitta pacifying properties in various health concerns like Jeerna jwara (fever exists more than 15 days), bhrama (vertigo), amlapitta (hyperacidity), somaroga (excessive urination in women) and other excessive pitta aggregation diseases.


127. Kasa Sanharbhairav Rasa
Reference – Bhaishajya-Ratnavali Kasrogadhikar 446/84-90
Introduction
Kasa sanharbhairav rasa is an Ayurvedic medicine. This is used in all types of cough and dyspnea. This formulation is made by Acharya Shri Gehannath.

Ingredients
Shuddha Parada (Purified Mercury)
Shuddha Gandhak (Purified Sulphur)
Tamra Bhasma (Copper Calx)
Abhrak Bhasma (Mica Calx)
Shankha Bhasma (Pearl Calx)
Shuddha Tankan (Purified Citrus tankan)
Loha Bhasma (Iron Calx)
Maricha Churna (Piper nigrum)
Kushtha Churna (Saussurea lappa)
Taalish Patra Churna (Abies webbiana)
Jaiphal Churna (Myristica fragrans)
Lavanga Churna (Syzygium aromaticum)
Description of Ingredients
Shuddha Parada – This is mercury in pure form. In Ayurveda, this is used in various medicines as a main ingredient. This is helpful in treating respiratory, gastrointestinal, cardiac and other system disorders. This mainly works on respiratory symptoms such as Cough, dyspnea etc. This is also used as a Rasayan.
Shuddha Gandhak – This is the best ingredient for blood purification. This is also helpful in increasing Agni bala (fire strength) in our body. This is used in Ayurveda after purification. It relieves burning sensation. This pacifies Kapha dosha and hence used in acute or chronic cough.
Tamra Bhasma – Tamra is also known as copper. This copper Bhasma is used as an antacid (cures acidity), Expectorant (helpful in clearing the respiratory tract or treats cough), digestive stimulant (helps in digestion and absorption), lowers bilirubin (treats jaundice).
Abhrak Bhasma – Bhasma is used in Ayurveda for a variety of diseases. Abhraka Bhasma is a classical Ayurvedic formulation. This is used in Ayurveda for respiratory disorders and also in liver and spleen diseases. It manages all types of cough.
Shankha Bhasma – It is an Ayurvedic remedy which is prepared from a conch shell. This is used in diarrhea, skin problems, hepatomegaly, digestive problems etc. This is also helpful in cough and dyspnea. It is a good source of calcium supplement.
Shuddha Tankan – This is also known as calcined borax and an Ayurvedic formulation prepared from borax powder. This is used in productive cough, breathing problems, wheezing, abdominal problems etc.
Loha Bhasma – This is an Iron formulation and is best in blood disorders. This formulation is effective anemia, general debility, and liver enlargement. This acts as an expectorant means used in producing cough and clearing the pathway.
Maricha Churna – This is the most common ingredient which is found in various Ayurvedic formulations, due to its wide range of health benefits. It helps in increasing digestive power, pacifying Kapha dosha, relieves cough etc. This enhances the digestive fire.
Kushtha Churna – It is known as costus root and is a famous Ayurvedic herb used in treating gout, skin diseases, respiratory disorders etc. It gives relief from chronic cough and breathlessness. It balances Kapha dosha due to its bitter and pungent taste.
Taalish patra Churna – This is an Ayurvedic formulation in powder form. This is mainly used in respiratory conditions. It has bronchodilator, antitussive and mucolytic properties.
Jaiphal Churna – It is also called as Nutmeg. The fruit of Jaiphal is known for its fragrance and aroma. It has a bitter and pungent taste and hot potency. It balances Kapha and Vata dosha. It is very useful in clearing the throat, relieves cough and asthma problems. It is also helpful in diarrhea. It is also used in bloating, flatulence and abdominal pain.
Lavanga Churna – This is an Ayurvedic medicine in a herbal powder form. It is used in cough, abdominal pain, bloating and diarrhea. It is also helpful in treating fever and indigestion.
Bhavna Dravya (Ingredients)
Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica)
Bhringraj Swaras (Extracts of Eclipta alba)
Nirgundi Swaras (Extracts of Vitex negundo)
Kakmachiswaras (Solanum nigrum)
Dronapushpi (Leucas cephalotes)
Shalaparni Swaras (Desmodium gangeticum)
Aragvadha (Cassia fistula)
Bharangi (Clerodendron serratum)
Haritaki kwath (Decoction of Terminalia chebula)
Vasapatraswaras (Extracts of Adhatoda vasica)
Method of Preparation
First of all prepare kajjali from Parada and Gandhak.
Then add all the rest of the ingredients in this kajjali.
After then give bhavna with above mentioned bhavana dravya one by one.
Then make 625 mg tablet and let them dry.
Kept these tablets in a glass container.
Medicinal Properties
Kasa sanharbhairav rasa is a classical herbal formulation. This is the best remedy for the treatment of all types of Cough and dyspnea. The ingredients in this formulation help in clearing the obstruction in the respiratory pathway by treating cough. This is also helpful in digestive problems such as indigestion, acidity, abdominal pain etc. This also enhances the digestion power, provides strength and complexion to the skin.

Indications
All types of cough
Bronchitis
Bronchial Asthma
Sore throat
Abdominal pain
Indigestion
Acidity
Dosage
1 tablet twice a day with honey or with the decoction of Vasa (Adhatoda vasica), Shunthi (Zingiber officinale), Kantkari (Solanum virginianum).

Cautions
It should be taken under medical supervision.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


128. Sphatika Bhasma – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Ayurveda Prakasha 257 – 258
Sphatika Bhasma is also known by the names like Tuvari, kankshi and Phataki etc. It is hemostatic, bitter, anti-inflammatory and antiseptic in nature. It acts as the blood purifier and used for treatment of various skin diseases like leucoderma and herpes. This Ayurvedic preparation is also beneficial in the treatment of bleeding disorders and hemorrhage. It is also helpful to treat the various other problems like abdominal pains, respiratory complications and a few gynecological disorders like menorrhagia. This medicine balances the vata and pitta dosha in body.

Ingredient
Alum (Sphatika)

Method of Manufacturing
Sphatika – Alum (Sphatika) is heated in a pan, in open air, till all the moisture is lost. At the end, white powder is collected.

Indications
It is useful in abnormal bleeding from uterus.
It acts as the blood purifier.
Useful in wounds and skin diseases like leucoderma.
Use of this medicine is quite effective in the respiratory complications like cough, bronchitis, pneumonia, chronic coughing, whooping cough and asthma.
Lower back ache.
It is used for the treatment of menorrhagia.
Hematemesis (Blood vomiting).
It is used in ulcers with burning sensation and gastritis.
It is used to cure gynecological issues like leucorrhea and vaginal itching etc.
Used in the treatment of leucoderma and herpes etc.
Malarial fever, chronic fever and jaundice.
Eye diseases.
Constricts blood vessels and tissues.
Sphatika Bhasma Dosage
Take 125 – 250 mg, one or two times daily, before or after food, or as advised by Ayurvedic doctor.

Contradictions
It is advisable to take this medicine only under medical supervision, especially for children, pregnant and lactating mothers.
Take this medicine only in prescribed dosage for particular time period only.
Store in a cool dry place.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


129. Arsha Kuthar Ras – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Ayurveda sarsangrah, page no 248-249:17
Arsha Kuthar Ras is an Ayurvedic medicine in tablet form. It is used for the treatment of piles (hemorrhoids). This medicine should only be taken under strict medical supervision.

Ingredients
Purified Mercury – 48 g
Shuddha Gandhaka – Herbal purified Sulphur – 96 g
Loha Bhasma – Bhasma prepared from Iron – 96 g
Tamra bhasma – Bhasma prepared from copper – 96g
Danti – Baliospermum montanum – 240 g
Sonth – Zingiber officinalis – 240 g
Maricha – Black pepper – Piper nigrum – 240 g
Shuddha Vatsanabha – Purified Aconitum ferox – 240 g
Vanshlochan (Tabasheer) – Bamboo Silica (Bamboo Manna) – 240 g
Tankana Bhasma – Borax – 240 g
Yava Kshara – Kshara of Barley – Hordeum vulgare – 240 g
Saindhava Lavana – Rock salt – 240 g
Gomutra – Cow urine – 1.65 litres
Snuhi Ksheera – Latex of Euphorbia neriifolia – 384 g
Method of Preparation
Given quantities of mercury and sudha gandhak are taken to make kajjali (traditional Ayurvedic preparation). Rest of ingredients in powder form are added in this. Then separately Cow urine and snuhi ksheera are cooked on the slow heat. When it gets turned into a semi solid mass, then all the other ingredients are added in this and then tablets of 250 mg are made.

Dosage
Take 125 – 250 mg once or twice a day, before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor. It is traditionally administered along with honey, hot water.

Indications
Piles
Constipation
Indigestion
Anorexia
Side Effects
This medicine should be strictly taken only under medical supervision.
Self-medication with this medicine can be dangerous, since it contains heavy metal ingredient.
Take this medicine in precise dose and for limited period of time, as advised by doctor.
Over-dosage may be harmful.
Avoid this in pregnancy, lactation and in children.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Store in a dry cool place.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


130. Bala Punarnavadi Kashayam
Reference: Sahasrayoga Kashayayoga Prakarana
Bala Punarnavadi Kashayam is an Ayurvedic medicine in the liquid form. This herbal decoction is used to treat the abdominal diseases like abdominal pain, constipation, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, rheumatoid arthritis, gout, hyperuricemia etc.

Ingredients
Bala – Sida cordifolia / Sida retusa
Punarnava – Boerhaavia diffusa
Eranda – Castor root – Ricinus communis
Shunti – Ginger – Zingiber officinalis
Gokshura – Tribulus terrestris
Method of Preparation
All the above mentioned ingredients are added with 8 parts of water. It is boiled until reduced to quarter part. Further it is filtered to make the Bala Punarnavadi Kashayam.

Dosage
Take 15 – 30 ml, once or twice a day, before food or on empty stomach, or as directed by physician.
It is usually given along with goat milk.
If goat milk is not available, it can be taken along with lukewarm water.
Indications
Anorexia
Improves digestion and relieves bloating.
Peptic ulcers
Dysuria
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Gout
Hyperuricemia
Side Effects
Over-dosage may result in the slight burning sensation in stomach.
This medicine should be taken under strict medical supervision for Children, pregnant and lactating mothers.
Store in a cool dry place.
Keep out of reach and sight of Children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


131. Arogyavardhini Vati
Reference: Rasendra Sara Sangraha, Jwara Rogadhikara 13 – 105
Arogyavardhini Vati is an Ayurvedic medicine in tablet form. It is used in the treatment of liver diseases, fever, skin diseases, etc. This medicine should only be taken under strict medical supervision as it contains heavy metal ingredient. It balances the tri doshas – Vata, Pitta and Kapha in body.

Ingredients
Shuddha Parada – Herbal purified Mercury – 10 g
Shuddha Gandhaka – Herbal purified Sulphur – 10 g
Loha Bhasma – Bhasma prepared from Iron – 10 g
Abhraka Bhasma – Purified and processed Mica – 10 g
Tamra Bhasma – Bhasma prepared from Copper – 10 g
Haritaki – Chebulic Myrobalan fruit rind – Terminalia chebula – 20 g
Vibhitaki – Belliric Myrobalan fruit rind – Terminalia bellirica – 20 g
Amalaki – Indian gooseberry fruit – Emblica officinalis – 20 g
Shilajatu – Asphaltum – 30 g
Pura – Guggulu – Indian bedelium (gum resin) – Commiphora mukul – 40 g
Chitra – Eranda – Castor – Ricinus communis – 40 g
Tikta – Katuki – Picrorhiza kurroa – 220 g
Juice extract of Nimba – Neem – Azadirachta indica – Quantity Sufficient.
Method of Preparation
Fine power of above ingredient is ground with the neem juice extract, made into paste and pills are prepared.

Medicinal Properties
It is an herbal formulation which is useful in all types of diseases. It helps to balance all three doshas i.e. vata, pitta and kapha in body. It is useful in problems related to heart, stomach, liver, spleen, gall bladder, skin, teeth and gums like thyroid disorders, obesity, psoriasis etc. It acts as a digestive stimulant and improves the function of digestive system. It has various pharmacological action like Appetizer, Carminative, Mild laxative, Anti-obesity, Liver tonic, Anti-inflammatory, Antipruritics, Demulcent, Anti-hypertensive, Hematogenic (helps in formation of red blood cells), Mild Expectorant etc. It is helpful to reduce the symptoms associated with various heart disease and manages the hypertension and high cholesterol level in body. It acts as a cardiac tonic. It improves both digestion and metabolic process. It provides relief from constipation and related disorders. It helps to remove the toxins from the body and acts as a great detoxifier. It also has both anti-bacterial and anti-viral properties and helpful in all types of liver problems like hepatitis, jaundice, inflammatory disease of liver, fatty liver etc.

Indications
Acute and chronic fever
Obesity
Liver disorders
Anorexia
Improves digestion
Cardiac tonic
Itching
Eczema
Psoriasis
Urticaria
Pyorrhea
Dosage
Take 120 – 500 mg once or twice a day before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor. It is usually administered along with honey, fresh ginger juice, neem juice, water or milk.

Side Effects
Self-medication with this medicine is discouraged as it contains Mercury as ingredient.
Take this medicine in precise dose and for limited period of time, as advised by doctor.
Over-dosage may cause severe poisonous effect.
Avoid this medicine during pregnancy, lactation and in children.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Store in a dry cool place.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


132. Arshohara Chandraprabha Vati – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Introduction
Arshohara Chandraprabha Vati is an ayurvedic formulation. This formulation is formualated from the mixture of minerals and herbs.

Ingredients
Musta – Cyperus rotundus
Ela – Elettaria Cardamomum
Yavakshara – Hordeum vulgare
Tejapatra – Cinnamomum tamala
Danti – Baliospermum montanum
Vacha – Acorus Calamus
Sajjikshara
Ativisha – Aconitum heterophyllum
Kachura – Curcuma zedoaria
Pippali Moola – Piper longum
Swarnamakshika – copper iron sulphide
Dhaniyaka – Coriandrum sativum
Daruharidra – Berberis aristata
Haridra – Curcuma longa
Devadaru – Cedrus dcodara
Gajapippali – Scindapsus officinalis
Nelavemu – Andrographis paniculata
Vidanga – Embelia ribes
Vamshalochana – Bambusa arundinacea
Trikatu
Triphala
Shilajit – asphaltum
Guggulu – Commiphora wightii
Saindhava lavana – rock salt
Sauvarchala Lavana – black salt
Loha Bhasma – iron calx
Sugar
Method of Preparation
All the ingredients are added to shilajit and guggulu and pills are made.

Dose
2 pills two times a day with butter milk, draksharishta or coconut water.

Indications
Arshas (Piles)
Vibandha (Constipation)
Contraindications
Take the medicine under ayurvedic doctor’s prescription.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


133. Brahmi Ghrita – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Ashtanga Hridayam Uttarsthana 6/23-25
Brahmi Ghrita is a very famous Ayurvedic medicine available in the herbal ghee form. This medicine has ghee as its base. It is mainly used for treatment of improving intelligence, learning skills and speech. It balances the vata, pitta and kapha.

Ingredients
Brahmi – Bacopa monnieri juice extract – 1.536 liters
Ghrita – 768 ml
12 g of each of:-
Trikatu – Pepper, long pepper and ginger
Shweta and Krishna Trivrit – Operculina turpethum
Danti – Baliospermum montanum
Shankhapushpi – Clitorea ternatea
Nripadruma – Cassia fistula
Saptala – Acacia sinuata
Krumihara – Embelia ribes
Dosage
As medicine – quarter to half teaspoon with water, usually before food, once or twice a day, or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor. It is usually administered with warm water.

Use of Brahmi Ghrita as a Brain Tonic for Healthy People
Healthy people can take Brahmi Ghrita as a brain tonic just before your morning cup of coffee / tea / milk. You can take it for up to two months.

Indications
Improving learning skills
Intelligence
Memory
Speech
Skin diseases
Epilepsy and female infertility
Impotency
Depression
Fatigue
Myalgia
Stress disorder
Side Effects
There are no known side effects with this medicine.
It is best to use this product under medical supervision.
Self-medication with this medicine is discouraged.
People with diabetes, high cholesterol, heart diseases and high BP should exercise precaution.
In very high dose, it may cause diarrhea and indigestion.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



134. Gandhaka Rasayana
Reference: Yogaratnakara Rasayana Adhikara 1 – 4, Rasatarangini 8th chapter
Introduction
Gandhaka Rasayana is classical Ayurvedic preparation available in herbal powder or tablet form. It maintains the balances of Vata, Pitta and Kapha Doshas. Gandhak Rasayana is having antibacterial, antiviral and antimicrobial properties. It is useful in the treatment of skin diseases, itching, chronic fever, and urinary tract disorders etc.

Ingredients
10 g fine powder of Gandhaka – Purified Sulphur
Godugdha (Cow milk)
Cinnamon (Cinnamomum zeylanicum) – Water decoction / juice extract
Ela (Cardamom) (Elettaria cardamomum)
Patra (Cinnamomum tamala)
Nagakeshara (Mesua ferrea)
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) – Stem
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) – Fruit rind
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis / Phyllanthus emblica)
Vibhitaki (Terminalia bellerica)
Shunti (Ginger) (Zingiber officinalis) – Rhizome
Bhringaraja (Eclipta alba)
Sita (Sugar Syrup)
Method of Preparation
Grind the Purified Sulphur (Shuddha Gandhaka) with cow milk three times. Then grind it till dried, for 8 times with each of the following liquids:

Water decoction of Triphala (Haritaki, Vibhitaki and Amalki)
Chaturjata Phanta – A tea prepared with Chaturjata (Cardamom, Tejpatta, cinnamon and Nagakesar)
Decoction of Guduchi
Bhringaraja kashaya – decoction of Eclipta alba
Shrungavera rasa – fresh ginger juice extract.
Rigorous grinding turns the mass into fine paste.

It is then turned into tablet form or stockpiled in powder form and consumed along with equal parts of unrefined sugar.

Medicinal Properties
Gandhaka Rasayana is an effective Ayurvedic formulation that is able to keep the Vata, Pitta and Kapha dosha balanced, possessing antibacterial, antimicrobial, antiviral, anti-inflammatory, demulcent, and antipruritic properties, which provide healing effects in various conditions.

An efficient Ayurvedic remedy for skin conditions, like, in Urticaria, it provide relief from itching and burning sensation, is able to reduce itching and scabies rashes in scabies as well as useful in Psoriasis, reduces the rashes and provide relief from Eczema. Its blood purifying activity helps to reduce the acne and pimples and helps to improve the skin complexion. It is even good to use in leprosy as well as, heal boils, etc.

It possess the property to enhance the immunity of the body and hence helps to fight against infections. Also anti-aging in action.

It is helpful in managing the body temperature during chronic fever.

It is even beneficial in urinary tract disorders etc.

It is helpful for illness related to digestive system, as in diarrhea, reduces the frequency of stools, and improves digestion. Also benefits in malabsorption syndrome, improves the absorption of nutrients and strengthen the digestive power.

It has useful effects in bleeding disorders and good for oligospermia condition.

Therapeutic Uses
Gandhaka Rasayana is very good remedy in case of chronic fever,
Potent Ayurvedic remedy in skin diseases, pruritus and diarrhea,
Effective in treating urinary tract disorders, bleeding disorders, oligospermia.
Efficient anti-aging medicine and immunity booster.
It can improve digestion and skin complexion
It can cure malabsorption syndrome
Efficient wound healer and pain reliever.
Dosage
Children:-
Up to 5 years: Below 250 mg each day.
5-12 years: 250 mg-1 gram in divided doses each day.
Adults:-
1-3 grams in divided doses each day.
1-2 times a day before or after meals or as suggested by Ayurvedic doctor.
Contraindications/ Side Effects
Self-medication is strictly prohibited, have it only under medical supervision.
This medicine must be taken within precise dose and for required time as recommended by doctor.
In case of Diabetic, hypertensive patients, cardiac patients, obese people, pregnant ladies, lactating mothers and children this medicine must be consumed strictly under medical supervision.
In Diabetes before taking it, keep a check on blood sugar levels as it has sugar,
Keep it away from children reach.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


135. Kamagnisandeepan Rasa
Reference – Bhaishajya-Ratnavali Vajikaranadhikar 1138/137-139
Introduction
Kamagnisandeepan rasa is an Ayurvedic medicine. This is a classical formulation which is used in enhancing immunity and strength of the body.

Ingredients
Shuddha Parada (Purified Mercury) – 100 gm
Shuddha Gandhak (Purified Sulphur) – 100 gm
Shuddha Hingula (Red Sulphide of Mercury) – 100 gm
Shuddha Manahshila (Realgar) – 100 gm
Description of Ingredients
Shuddha Parada – This is a purified form of Mercury. This is used in Ayurveda for a variety of diseases as a main ingredient. This ingredient acts as a Rasayan and is beneficial in all types of systems in the body such as gastrointestinal, reproductive etc. It enhances the Agni of the body.
Shuddha Gandhak – This is a purified form of Sulphur.  This is used as a blood purifier. This is useful in increasing digestive power by enhancing digestive fire which is called Agni in Ayurveda.
Shuddha Hingula – It is an Ayurvedic medicine and contains heavy metals. It is used in Ayurvedic medicine after purification. It is Deepana (Stimulates digestive power) and acts as Rasayan. It also has aphrodisiac properties.
Shuddha Manahshila – This ingredient is useful in reproductive problems. It pacifies vata and Kapha dosha. It is also helpful in cough, dyspnea, worm infestation etc.
Bhavna Dravya
Dhatura Beej Kwath (Decoction of the seeds of the Datura metel)
Jayantipatra Swaras (Extracts of the leaves of Sesbania sesban)
Bhringraj Swaras (Eclipta prostrata)
Method of Preparation
Make a kajjali from Parada and Gandhak.
Then properly mix Hingula and Manahshila in this kajjali.
Then give alternate 7 bhavna with Dhatura Beej kwath, Jayantipatra swaras, Bhringraj swaras.
After drying make a fine powder and keep 400 gm of this fine powder of kajjali in an airtight glass bottle which is painted by the soil 7 times.
Then heat this bottle over flames for 6 days.
On 7th day take out this mixture and give proper frolement with following herbs like powder of Elaichi (Elettaria cardamomum), Jaiphal (Myristica fragrans), Maricha (Piper nigrum), Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) and Karpur (Cinnamomum camphora), Kasturi (Abelmoschus moschatus).
Medicinal Properties
Kamagnisandeepan rasa is a Classical Ayurvedic formulation. The ingredients in this formulation help in boosting the immunity. They provide strength to the body. This formulation is helpful in various sexual problems such as Erectile Dysfunction, premature ejaculation, low sperm count etc. This is the best Rasayan till date. This formulation also nourishes the bodily tissues as well.

Indications
Low Immunity
Weakness
Erectile Dysfunction
Premature Ejaculation
Low Sperm Count
Dosage
375 gm twice a day with honey or Tambul patra (Cinnamomum tamala).

Cautions
It should be taken strictly under medical supervision.
Avoid during pregnancy.
Avoid in children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


136. Laghu Malini Vasanta Rasa
Reference: Yogaratnakara, Jwaradhikara 211.
Laghu Malini Vasanta Rasa is an Ayurvedic medicine in tablet or powder form. It is used in the treatment of chronic fever, menorrhagia, eye disorders etc. It balances the Pitta doshas hence it is an effective medicine to treat the pitta disorders.

Ingredients
Rasaka Bhasma – Bhasma (Calx) of Zinc Sulphide – 20 g
Maricha – Black pepper – Piper nigrum – 10 g
Butter and lemon juice – Quantity sufficient.
Method of Preparation
Bhasma (Calx) of Zinc Sulphide and Black pepper grounded with butter and Lemon juice till the stickiness is removed from the medicine.

Medicinal Properties
Laghu Malini Vasanta Rasa is very effective Ayurvedic formulation for pitta diseases. This is an effective natural remedy for body heat and indicated in health issues where pitta and rakta vitiation is there.

This Ayurvedic medicine is useful remedy to manage the chronic fever as well as good to use in intermittent fever as in case of malaria. It is also helpful in dealing with female health related problems. It is able to manage menorrhagia, controls the bleeding and supports the proper flow during mensuration. It also provides relief from the problems in leucorrhea, reduces the excessive vaginal discharge. It is even suitable Ayurvedic remedy to cope up with problems arising during pregnancy, as it is very helpful to stabilize the fetus, thereby reduces the tendency of abortion.

It is also supportive in combating bleeding disorders like, hemorrhoids, anal fistula and colitis. It stops bleeding and provides soothing effects to body up to a great extent.

Indications
Fever
Pthisis
Menorrhagia
Leucorrhoea
Hemorrhoids
Disorders during pregnancy
Chronic fever
Diarrhea
Intermittent fever
Dosage
Take 250 mg once or twice a day, before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor. It is traditionally administered along with milk, honey.

Side Effects
Self-medication with this medicine is dangerous.
Take this medicine in precise dose and for limited period of time, as advised by doctor.
Over-dosage may cause severe poisonous effect.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


137. Laghu Sutshekhar Ras – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Rasa Tantra Sara – Siddha Yoga Sangraha – Kharaliya Rasayana 330
Laghu Sutshekhar Ras is an Ayurvedic medicine in tablet or powder form. This medicine is used in the treatment of headache, migraine etc. It balances Vata and Pitta doshas in body.

Ingredients
Swarna gairika – Purified Red Ochre – Iron Oxide – 240 g
Shunthi – Ginger (rhizome) – Zingiber officinalis – powder – 120 g
Nagavalli – Betel leaf juice extract – Piper betel – quantity sufficient for grinding for three days.
Medicinal Properties
Laghu Sutshekhar Ras provides many health benefits because of its medicinal properties like detoxifier, antiemetic, digestive, stimulant, carminative, antacid and anti-inflammatory.

It is very useful Ayurvedic medicine to provide relief from headache, migraine and fatigue etc. by improving blood circulation and providing strength to the brain, hence helps to alleviate the painful conditions and other discomfort. Laghu Sutshekhar Ras also helps in bringing the sound sleep, in case of insomnia. It is helpful to lessen the symptoms happening in mental disorders, such as agitation, restlessness, impatience, vertigo and excessive sweating etc.

It is very useful remedy to manage digestive disorders as in case of gastritis and acidity it provides plenty of relief from heartburn, also improves digestion. Good to reduce nausea and vomiting. It helps to enhance the appetite.

Laghu Sutshekhar Ras is also helpful in Epistaxis (manages nose bleeding). Also useful in many other bleeding disorders.

It is even beneficial in sinusitis, mouth ulcers and pharyngitis etc. This Ras provide good results in halitosis even.

Indications
Headache
Migraine
Gastritis
Dyspepsia
Sinusitis
Burning sensation
Nasal bleeding
Stomatitis
Dosage
Take 250 – 500 mg once or twice a day, before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor. It is advised along sugar and milk.

Side Effects
Self-medication with this medicine is not advised.
Take this medicine in precise dose and for limited period of time, as advised by doctor.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


138. Navaloha Chintamani
Reference: Vaidya chintamani
Introduction
Navaloha Chintamani is an herbal formulation which is used to cure respiratory disorders.

Ingredients
Swarnamakshik Bhasma
Haratala (Orpiment)
Rajata Bhasma (Silver)
Vanga Bhasma (Tin)
Kantaloha Bhasma (Magnetic iron calx)
Purified Manashila (Purified realgar)
Abhraka Bhasma (Calcined mica)
Naga Bhasma (Calcined lead)
Vaikranta Bhasma (Tourmaline)
Shilajit Bhasma (Asphaltum)
Mauktika Bhasma
Swarna Bhasma (Gold)
Dosage
10 grams in 50 doses with honey.

Indications
Cough
Respiratory disorders
Contraindications
Take under medical supervision.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


139. Navaratna Raja Mriganka Rasa
Reference: Yogaratnakara
Introduction
Navaratna Raja Mriganka Rasa is an Ayurvedic formulation in the form of tablets. This medicine consists of purified heavy metal ingredients, so, it should only be taken under strict medical supervision. It is an amazing anti-aging Ayurvedic remedy, useful in many diseases.

Ingredients
Shuddha Parada [Purified and processed Mercury]
Shuddha Gandhaka [Purified and processed Sulphur]
Swarna Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Gold]
Rajata Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Silver]
Kharpara Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Zinc Sulphide]
Vaikranta Bhasma [Bhasma (calx) of Tourmaline]
Loha Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Iron]
Vanga Bhasma [Bhasma of Tin]
Naga Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Lead]
Heeraka Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Diamond]
Pravala Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Coral]
Vimala Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Iron Pyrite]
Manikya Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Ruby]
Panna Bhasma
Tapya Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Realgar]
Mukta Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Pearl]
Pushparaga Bhasma
Shankha Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Conch shell]
Vaidurya Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Cat’s eye]
Tamra Bhasma [Bhasma (calx) of Copper]
Shukti Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Conch Pearl Oyster]
Shuddha Haratala/Purified Orpiment [Arsenis tri sulphide]
Abhraka Bhasma [Bhasma (calx) of Mica]
Purified Cinnabar [Ore of Mercury]
Manashila/Purified Realgar [Arsenic Di Sulphide]
Gomeda Bhasma [Bhasma (Calx) of Zircon]
Nila Bhasma
Juice extract / decoction of:-
Small caltrops [Tribulus terrestris]
Betel leaf [Piper betel]
Malabar nut tree [Adhatoda vasica]
Mundi [Sphaeranthus indicus]
Long pepper [Piper longum]
Chitraka [Plumbago zeylanica]
Sugarcane [Saccharum officinarum]
Tinospora [Tinospora cordifolia]
Dhatura [Datura metal
Mucronata root [Premna corymbosa]
Raisins [Vitis vinifera]
Shatavari [Asparagus racemosus]
Spreading Hogweed [Boerhaavia diffusa]
Shatapatrika [Anethum sowa]
Licorice [Glycyrrhiza glabra]
Shalmali [Bombax malabaricum]
Fire flame bush [Woodfordia fruticosa]
Nutmeg [Myristica fragrans]
Country mallow [Sida cordifolia]
Nagabala [Sida cordata]
Atibala [Abutilon indicum]
Mahabala [Sida rhombifolia]
Hrivera [Pavonia odorata]
Cinnamon [Cinnamomum zeylanicum]
Clove [Syzigium aromaticum]
Kankola [Piper cubeba]
Mrigamada
Nagakeshara [Mesua ferrea]
Camphor [Cinnamomum camphora]
Kasturi [Musk]
Method of Preparation
Clean all the ingredients and make a decoction of the herbs and triturate the bhasmas in the decoction and make a paste like consistency and make pills of the paste. Let them dry and store them in a clean airtight jar.

Dosage
One tablet twice a day after meals.

Indications
Anorexia
Jaundice
Liver disorders
Fever
Pthisis
Emaciation
Malabsorption syndrome
Abdominal colic
Heart burn
Epilepsy
Asthma
Bloating
Contraindications
Self-medication is not encouraged.
Over dosage might lead to poisonous effects.
It is best avoided during pregnancy, lactation and in children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


140. Kamdudha Ras – Ek Vishishtha Adhyana
Abstract
Kamdudha ras is an ayurvedic rasa aushadhi (mineral formulation) mentioned in classical texts. It is commonly indicated in pittaja and raktaja roga. The main reference of kamdudha ras is amlapitta but along with that it is also indicated in most of the pittaja and raktja roga. It possess several properties like sheeta (cold potency), rakta prasaadak (purifies blood), hridya (promotes heart health), pitta shamaka (pacifies pitta), dhatu vardhak (nourishes body tissues), balya (promotes strength). In this article we are going to share all the reviews about kamdudha ras from its preparation to indication and application in different diseases.

Introduction
In this present era people are magnetting toward ayurvedic medications on seeing the effectiveness and great results of herbal remedies. Ayurvedic formulations are of three types: mineral, herbal, and mixture of herbal and mineral. Kamdudha ras is one among Rasaushadhis (herbo-mineral) remedies. It is prepared in kharal (pestle and mortar). It mainly composed of mukta bhasma (calx of pearl), pravala bhasma (calx of coral), moonga (corallium rubrum), muktashukti bhasma (calx of oyster shell), varatika bhasma (calx of cowries shell), shankha bhasma (calx of conch shell), shuddha suvarna gairik (purified red ochre) and guduchi satva (Tinospora cordifolia). This is indicated in various health conditions such as amlapitta, vertigo, psychosis, bleeding disorders, emesis, nausea, heart diseases, renal disorders, insect bite, excessive menstrual bleeding. In further study we will discuss all about its preparation and health benefits in detail.

Kamdudha Ras – Ingredients, Preparation And Their Therapeutic Uses
According to ras yog sagar kamdudha ras preparation is of three types that are pratham kamdudha ras, dvitiya kamdudha ras and tritiya kamdudha ras and the most widely used is tritiya kamdudha ras. Let’s take a look at three different types of kamdudha ras and their health benefits.

Pratham Kamdudha Ras
It is prepared with suvarna gairik (Silicate of Alumina and Iron oxide) and amla swaras (Emblica officinalis). In this preparation swarna gairik is heated at a mild heat after that it is processed with amla swaras for 7 or 21 times then make it dry.

Uses of Pratham Kamdudha Ras – When given in a dose of 6 ratti (0.72 gm) with equal amount of shakkar (jaggery), ghee or honey promotes haemoglobin levels. Also cure number of pittaja roga along with prameha (Diabetes mellitus), pradara (Leucorrhoea), pandu (anaemia), kamla (jaundice), excessive burning sensation, excessive thirst and many other ptta-raktaja roga.

Dvitiya Kamdudha Ras
The ingredients used in this preparation are guduchi satva (Tinospora cordifolia), swarna gairik (Silicate of Alumina and Iron oxide) and abhrak bhasma (calx of mica). Make fine powder of all the ingredients and mix it well.

Uses of Dvitiya Kamdudha Ras – It is used in the dose of 0.5 gm. If it is given along with go dugdha (cow’s milk) and rabdi or rice water and rabdi then it is beneficial in pradara (Leucorrhoea). In pitta aggravation it can be given along with ghee and rabdi.

Tritya Kamdudha Ras
Tritya kamdudha ras is widely used and includes several ingredients like mukta bhasma (calx of pearl), praval bhasma (calx of coral), mukta shukti (pearl oyster), Kapardika (Cowrie shells), swarna gairik (Silicate of Alumina and Iron oxide), and guduchi satva (Tinospora cordifolia). Take all these ingredients in equal amounts and mix it well.

Uses of Tritiya Kamdudha Ras – Jeerna jwara (fever exists more than 15 days), bhrama (vertigo), amlapitta (hyperacidity), somaroga (excessive urination in women) and all the pittaja conditions.

How Kamdudha Ras Is Beneficial In Different Health Conditions?
Amlapitta
“Amlam ch pittam amla pittam” which means when pitta dosha becomes amliya then the condition is known as amlapitta. Amlapitta is correlated to hyperacidity. It is a lifestyle disorder mainly occurs due to increase in pitta dosha which occurs due to excessive consumption of amla (sour) food, excessive alcohol intake, heavy and slimy food that causes obstruction in food channels, over eating, food which takes time to digest and produce acid, eating over indigestion, suppression of natural urge. Amlapitta is of two types- urdavaga amlapitta in which kapha dosha is associated which includes symptoms like vomitus of yellow, green, black colour, acid eructations, heartburn, headache, anorexia, itching, fever, boils and rashes. Adhoga amlapitta is associated with pitta dosha and symptoms include fainting, burning sensation, polydipsia, confusion, delusion, nausea, indigestion, sweating, horripilation and yellow tinge of the body.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Amlapitta – The main ingredient that helps in curing amlapitta is sudha varga (kaparda, mukta shukti and many others mentioned above). It helps in curing amlapitta by its cold potency and lowering the levels of aggravated pitta in the body that is the main reason of amlapitta. It can be administered along with ghrita or amla swarasa and nagkesar churna.

Raktapitta
“Raktam ch pittam iti raktapittam” Raktapitta is considered as one of the bleeding disorders in which the vitiated pitta vitiates rakta dosha and which flows out of the body through any of the body’s orifices. The reason behind raktapitta is ushna ahara (hot potency food), kshara ahara (alkali food), lavna ahara (salty food), excessive sitting under sun, excessive walking, depression, anxiety, fear, eating milk along with salty food products. It is of three types on the basis of types- urdhva raktapitta which can cause symptoms like bleeding occurs from the upper orifices (mouth, eyes, nose and ears) and blood is oily, sticky, yellowish tinge and associated with kapha dosha. Second type is adhoga raktapitta and the symptoms that occur in adhoga raktapitta are associated with vata dosha and bleeding occurs from orifices of the lower body like anus, vagina and penis. And the third one is ubhya margi raktapitta in which symptoms of both urdhva and adhoga raktapitta are included.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Raktapitta – The effective ingredient for raktapitta is swarna gairik (Silicate of Alumina and Iron oxide) that possess rakta stambhak properties which in turn correct and subsides the raktapitta. For better effect it can be given with amla murabba or durva swarasa.

Hridroga
Hridroga includes a wide variety of cardiac diseases and among those diseases that are mentioned in Ayurvedic texts having brief explanations. Hridroga is of five types and pain dominating cardiac diseases are considered under Hridroga. The five types of hridroga are vataja, pittaja, kaphaja, tridodhaj and krimija hridya roga. The causes of these hrida roga are excessive exercise, excessive intake of bitter food, excessive purgations, excessive use of enemas, excessive thinking, fear, depression, secondary to untreatable disease, excessive vomiting, prolonged indigestion, suppression of natural urge, trauma, etc.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Hridroga – It is effective in pittaja type of hridroga. Sudha warga acts as the main ingredient in curing pittaja hridroga by its pitta pacifying properties which in turn reduces the burning sensation in the chest region.

Atisara
“Atisarnata saara atiara” which means excessive expulsion of  drava mala (watery stools) is known as atisara. Ati means excessive and saar means watery. As per modern it is correlated to diarrhoea and as per ayurvedic aspect its main cause is food heavy to digest, excessive oily food, excessive hot food, excessive liquid diet, excessive cold potency substance, indigestion, undercooked food, excessive water intake, excessive alcohol intake, fear, depression, suppression of natural urge like urination, defecation, etc, worm infestations, piles. Symptoms of atisara depends upon its types and its total types are 6 according to acharya charaka- vataja atisara includes watery stools of aruna varna (reddish colour), forty, dry and expel in less and small quantity through rectum frequent times. Pittaja atisara have pitta predominating symptoms like watery stool of yellow, blue, red, black in colour and smelly. Along with that, the patient feels daha (burning sensation in anal region), trishna (thirst), murcha (faintness), sarvanga daha (burning sensation in all body parts), excessive sweating, and fever. In kaphaja atisara patients have watery stools same as in pittaja atisara and along with that includes symptoms such as thirst, pain, burning in anal region. In sannipataja atisara tridoshas are involved and the symptoms that occur in this type of atisara include symptoms among above mentioned three types of atisara. Bhayaja and shokaja atisara both are having same types of symptoms like vataja atisara.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Atisara – It is mainly effective in pittaja atisara and the ingredient that is beneficial in pacifying pittaja atisara is sudha warga due to its pitta shamak (pacifies pitta) properties.

Mukhapaka
Mukha pakka is split into two words, mukha means mouth and paka means ulceration and the main reason for paka is pitta dosha elevation. The cause of mukhpaka is excessive intake of pitta predominating food, stress, anxiety and other conditions in which pitta dosha is aggravated like ulcerative colitis, crohn’s disease and even gastritis. Also some chemical irritants may lead to ulceration.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Mukhapaka – Mukhapaka is mainly cured by the mukta bhasma and praval bhasma present in kamdudha ras by its astringent, oleation, cold, pitta-vata pacifying properties.

Rakta Pradara
Also known as asrigdara- asriga means blood dara means excessive flow. It is considered as heavy bleeding during menstruation and the vitiated pitta and rakta dosha are responsible for that. Many factors are responsible for rakta pradara like dietary habits, lifestyle habits, mental stress and hormonal imbalance.

Benefits of Kamdudha Ras in Rakta Pradara – As we discussed above that the main reason behind rakta pradara is vitiated pitta and rakta dosha so the main ingredient that is responsible for alleviating the symptoms of rakta pradara is swarna gairik bhasma (Silicate of Alumina and Iron oxide) that pacifies both pitta and rakta dosha and cures the problem of rakta pradara.

To buy Kamdudha Ras, please visit store.planetayurveda.com/products/kamdudha-ras

Conclusion
Kamdudha Ras is rasaushadhi (herbo-mineral ayurvedic formulation) that is very effective in various types of pittaj vyadhis. In this article we discuss the great facts about kamdudha ras. According to ras yog sagar Kamdudha ras is of three types that are pratham kamdudha ras, dvitiya kamdudha ras and tritiya kamdudha ras. Pratham kamdudha ras and Dvitiya kamdudha ras  have swarna gairik as an active ingredient and it possesses raktastambhaka and pitta pacifying properties that are responsible for curing certain health conditions like Leucorrhoea, anaemia, jaundice, excessive burning sensation. On the other hand Tritiya kamdudha ras includes sudha warga as an active ingredients which acts due to its cold potency and pitta pacifying properties in various health concerns like Jeerna jwara (fever exists more than 15 days), bhrama (vertigo), amlapitta (hyperacidity), somaroga (excessive urination in women) and other excessive pitta aggregation diseases.



141. Shirah Shuladi Vajra Rasa
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali Shirorogadhikara
Introduction
Shirah Shuladi Vajra Rasa is an Ayurvedic medicine in tablet form. It is used in the treatment of headache. This medicine contains heavy metal ingredients, hence should only be taken under strict medical It balances Vata, Pitta Kapha.

Ingredients
Purified and processed Mercury
Purified and processed Sulphur
Bhasma (Calx) of Iron
Bhasma (Calx) of Copper
Indian Bedellium (resin) (Commiphora mukul)
Triphala [Terminalia chebula (Haritaki), Terminalia bellirica (Vibhitaki) & Phyllanthus emblica (Amla)]
Kushta (Saussurea lappa)
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Long pepper (Piper longum)
Shunti (Zingiber officinalis)
Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris)
Vidanga / False black pepper (Embelia ribes)
Bilva / Bael (Aegle marmelos)
Agnimantha (Premna corymbosa)
Shyonaka (Oroxylum indicum)
Gambhari / Coomb teak (Gmelina arborea)
Patala (Sterospermum suaveolens)
Shalaparni (Desmodium gangeticum)
Prishniparni (Uraria picta)
Brihati / Indian Nightshade (Solanum indicum)
Kantakari / Yellow berried night shade (Solanum xanthocarpum)
Decoction of Dashamoola quantity sufficient for grinding
Clarified butter / Cow ghee – quantity sufficient for grinding
Dosage
Take 125-250 mg twice a day after food. It is advised along with goat milk, honey or water.

Indications
Headache
Migraine
Tension headache
Vascular headache
Side Effects
This medicine should be strictly taken only under medical supervision.
Over-dosage may cause severe poisonous effect.
Self-medication with this medicine may prove to be dangerous, since it contains heavy metal ingredient.
This medicine should be avoided in pregnancy, lactation and in children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



142. Kanakasava
Reference: Bhaishajya Ratnavali, Hikkashvasadhikara (For managing hiccups and Asthma)
Introduction
Kanakasava is a herbal formulation generally used to treat respiratory disorders and is also anti- pyretic. It comprises of 5-10 percent self-generated alcohol. Kanakasava is also commonly used to cure respiratory conditions such as asthma, fever, cough and bleeding diseases. It also acts as a bronchodilator and natural mucolytic. Kanakasava also helps to treat chronic fever, injuries and bleeding disorders. It is also useful to relieve mucous congestion in chest.

Ingredients
S. No.	Name	Latin Name	Quantity
Kwatha Dravyas (Herbs for decoction)
1.	Dhatura	Datura metel	192 g
2.	Vasa	Adhatoda zeylanica	192 g
3.	Mulethi	Glycyrhhiza glabra	96 g
4.	Pippali	Piper longum	96 g
5.	Kantakari	Solanum indicum	96 g
6.	Nagakeshara	Mesua ferrea	96 g
7.	Shunthi	Zingiber officinale	96 g
8.	Bharngi	Clerodendrum serratum	96 g
9.	Talisapatra	Abies webbiana	96 g
Prakshepa Dravyas [Herbal additives for aroma and for accelerating process of fermentation]
10.	Dhataki	Woodfordia fruticosa	768 g
11.	Draksha	Vitis vinifera	960 g
Sandhana Dravyas [Fermentative agents]
12.	Sugar		4.800 kgs
13.	Honey		2.400 kgs
14.	Water for decoction		24.576 litres
Method of Preparation
Clean and dry the Kwatha Dravyas as well as the Pakshepa Dravyas and add it to 24.576 litres. Let it settle for some time and filter it with a muslin cloth. Transfer the filtered product to a clean jar and add prakshepa dravyas and other coarsely powdered drugs. Now, seal the jar and move it to the fermentation room and regularly observe the signs of fermentation. When the process is completed, the contents are filtered and stored in an amber colored bottle away from light and moisture.

Properties of Kanakasava
Use of this Ayurvedic medicine is quite effective to resolve the respiratory complications. Expectorant and decongestant properties of this medicine help to remove the mucous, phlegm from airy way, nasal channels, lungs etc. In the case of asthma, this medicine helps to manage the problems like narrowing of air ways, bronchial congestion. It also helps to alleviate the problems of shortness of breath by increasing the lungs capacity for oxygen intake. Antimicrobial properties of this medicine are quite helpful to fight against the various viral, bacterial and fungal infections. Kanakasava helps to enhance the immunity and maintains the good health of overall body. Use of this medicine is quite helpful to provide relief in heavy cough. This Ayurvedic medicine supports the good health of lungs. In the case of tuberculosis, it helps to manage the symptoms like fever, bloody mucus, coughing etc. in any lung injury, Kanakasava is helpful in healing of lungs tissues. In the case of Dyspnea, this medicine is good to resolve the problems like feeling suffocated, narrowing in the chest etc. This medicine is known to be quite good in managing the bleeding disorders like nasal bleeding and fevers.

Indications
Cough
Dyspnea
Asthma
Tuberculosis
Chest injury
Dosage
2-4 ml with equal water after meals twice daily.

Contraindications
Over dose can cause stomach irritation and diarrhea.

It shouldn’t be taken without medical supervision. It may also cause side effects similar to those of Dhatura poisoning.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


143. Smriti Sagar Ras
Reference: Yogaratnakara Apasmara Chikitsa
Introduction
Smriti Sagar Ras is an Ayurvedic medicine available in tablet form. It is used in the treatment of epilepsy and neurological diseases. It balances tridoshas – Vata, Pitta and Kapha in body. This medicine contains heavy metal ingredients, hence should only be taken under strict medical supervision.

Ingredients
10 g fine powder of each of
Shuddha Parada – Purified and processed Mercury
Shuddha Gandhaka – Purified and processed Sulphur
Shuddha Haratala – Purified Orpiment (Arsenis tri sulphide)
Manashila – Purified Realgar – Arsenic Di Sulphide
Tamra Bhasma – Bhasma (calx) of Copper
Quantity sufficient of water decoction or juice extract of following for grinding for 21 times each.
Vacha – Sweet flag (rhizome) – Acorus calamus
Brahmi – Thyme Leaved Gratiola (whole plant) – Bacopa monnieri
Katabhi – Jyotishmati – Celastrus paniculata
Properties of Smriti Sagar Ras
Smriti Sagar Ras is meant to resolve the neurological disorders. It is used to manage the various problems like epilepsy, memory loss, neuropathy etc. Natural ingredients used in the formulation of this medicine support the healthy brain functions. It acts as the rejuvenator for brain. It helps to enhance the memory, intelligence and learning skills. It acts the nervine tonic. This medicine works well to manage the symptoms associated with epilepsy like fainting, temporary confusion etc. Use of this medicine is quite effective for memory loss. Smriti Sagar Ras is also known to be quite effective in weakness, numbness, pain in hands and feet.

Indications
Epilepsy
Memory loss
Neuropathy
Dosage
Take 250 – 500 mg in the morning and evening, with ghee, before or after food or as directed by Ayurvedic doctor.

Side Effects
This medicine should be strictly taken only under medical supervision.
Over-dosage may result in the severe poisonous effect.
Self-medication with this medicine may prove to be dangerous, since it contains heavy metal ingredient.
Take this medicine in precise dose and for limited period of time, as advised by doctor.
This medicine should be avoided in pregnancy, lactation and in children.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


144. Tribhuvan Kirti Rasa – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference: Rasamrit Rasayoga Vijnaniya, 9/80 – 81
Introduction
Tribhuvan Kirti Rasa balances Vata and Kapha dosha. It is an Ayurvedic classical medicine in tablet form. The tablet is used in the treatment of acute and chronic fever. This medicine contains heavy metal ingredients, hence should only be taken under strict medical supervision.

Ingredients
Shuddha Hingula (Purified Cinnabar) (Ore of Mercury)
Shuddha Vatsanabha (Purified Aconitum ferox)
Shunti (Ginger) (Zingiber officinalis) – rhizome
Maricha (Black pepper) (Piper nigrum)
Pippali (Long pepper) (Piper longum)
Tankana Bhasma – Borax
Pippalimoola (Long pepper) (Piper longum) – root
Tulsi (Holy Basil) (Ocimum sanctum) – Juice extract
Dhattura (Datura metel) – Juice extract
Nirgundi (Vitex negundo) – Juice extract
Method of Preparation
About 10gm. of fine powder of – Shuddha Hingula, Shuddha Vatsanabha, Shunti, Maricha, Pippali, Tankana Bhasma and Pippalimoola are added one by one and mixed well by trituration in a mortar. Then grind this mixture to a soft paste with fresh juice of Tulsi till it become dry. Repeat this process for 3 times. Same procedure is repeated with Dhattura and Nirgundi respectively. The criteria to determine the final stage of the formulation before making pills is that it should not stick to the fingers when rolled. Pills dried in shade.

Dosage
Consume 60-125 mg 1-2 times daily, before or after having meals or as suggested by Ayurvedic doctor and administered along with honey, fresh ginger juice & tulsi juice.

Therapeutic Uses
This is good Ayurvedic treatment for all types of fever.
It is also suitable in spleen and liver diseases.
This tablet is good for increasing digestive power.
It is commonly indicated in problems like– influenza, tonsillitis, pharyngitis, laryngitis, bronchitis.
Contraindications / Side Effects
This Ayurvedic medicine must be consumed under strict directions only.
Its self-medication might be unsafe as it contains Aconitum as ingredient.
It is better to avoid in children as well as pregnant and lactating mothers.
It’s over dose might results in side effects like tremors, dizziness etc.
Have this medicine under recommended dose and specified period of time
It may cause bradycardia – lowering of heart beat.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.

145. Prabhanjana Vimardana Taila
Reference – Sahasrayogam, Taila Prakarana-5
Introduction
Prabhanjana vimardana thailam is a medicated oil for external use. This oil is effective for neuromuscular disorders, facial palsy, paraplegia, arthritis etc. Mainly this oil treats all the Vatagat disorders.

Ingredients
Take 25.6gm of Each of the Following
Bala (Sida cordifolia)
Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus)
Shigru (Moringa oleifera)
Varuna (Crataeva nurvala)
Arka (Calotropis procera)
Karanja (Pongamia pinnata)
Eranda (Ricinus communis)
Sahachara (Barleria prionitis)
Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera)
Prasarini (Paederia foetida)
Bilva (Aegle marmelos)
Shyonaka (Oroxylum indicum)
Gambhari (Gmelina arborea)
Patala (Stereospermum suaveolens)
Agnimantha (Premna integrifolia)
More Ingredients
Water for decoction – 24.576L,
Tila Taila (Sesamum indicum) – 1.536L
Cow milk – 3.072L
Curd – 1.536L
Kanjika – 1.536L
Prepare Paste Using 12gms Fine Powder of Each
Tagara (Valeriana wallichi)
Amarakashta (Cedrus deodara)
Ela (Elettaria cardamomum)
Shunti – Ginger (Zingiber officinalis)
Sarshapa-Mustard (Brassica juncea)
Choraka (Angelica glauca)
Shatahva (Anethum sowa)
Kushta (Saussurea lappa)
Sindhuttha (Rock salt)
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata)
Kalani Sarika – Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graceum)
Vacha (Acorus calamus)
Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica)
Mamsi (Nardostachys jatamansi)
Sarala (Pinus roxburghii)
Katurohini (Picrorhiza kurroa)
Description of Main Ingredients
Bala – The plant Sida cordifolia is a medicinal plant. The various portions of plant such as the root, stem and leaves can be used. It is analgesic, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory. The chemical composition of this herb comprises alkaloids, flavonoids, sterols, fatty acids. Its leaves contain small quantities of both ephedrine and pseudoephedrine which stimulate the CNS.
Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) – Shatavari is antispasmodic, nervine, anti-inflammatory, and antibacterial in nature.  It helps in balances pitta and kapha doshas. It contains Diosenin, rutin, flavonoids, Sarsapogenin etc
Shigru (Moringa oleifera) – It is an antioxidant herb. It helps to balance vata and kapha doshas. This herb is rich in calcium and magnesium and it improves strength of teeth and bones. It is also used in osteoporosis and various bone disorders.
Bilwa (Aegle marmelos) – It is rich in vit c, vitB1, vitB2, thiamine, riboflavin, carotene, calcium, potassium, fibre and rich in antioxidants. It has anti-inflammatory and laxative properties.
Method of Preparation
Add 25.6gms each of herbs in 24.576L water and boil it until reduced to 6.144L (Decoction).
Now 12gms of each of herbs- make a paste.
On simmer gas heat up the ksheera and add paste in it and 6.144l decoction, kanjika, curd.
When all moisture evaporates and oil is left behind, off the gas.
Keep it cool and then filter it in a bottle as Prabhanjana Vimardana taila.
Dosage & Usage
This medicated oil is recommended only for external use.
Apply 5-6 drops of oil and massage it on the affected body part twice or thrice a day.
It can be used for a longer period of time.
Therapeutic Uses
Beneficial for all Vata disorders
Vatagulma (Lump due to Vata dosha)
Vata vidradhi (Abscess due to vata dosha)
Antra Vriddhi (Hernia)
Ardita (Facial palsy)
Kati shula (Lower backache)
Malpresentation of fetus
Sciatica pain
Paraplegia
Benefits
It is used to treat abscess due to vata, hernia, abdominal colic pain, facial palsy etc.
Effective in various neuromuscular conditions.
Balances the vata dosha.
Controls rheumatism and gives quick relief.
Side Effects
Mainly shows no side effects on external application.

Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



146. Anilari Rasa
Reference – Bhaishajya-Ratnavali Vatavyadhirogadhikar 532/168-170
Introduction
Anilari Rasa is an Ayurvedic formulation. This Ayurvedic formulation is helpful in Vata disorders (Neurological diseases).

Ingredients
Shuddha Parada: The other name of parada is purified mercury. Parada is silver coloured liquid metal also called Quicksilver. An effective drug which pacifies all the three Doshas and has vrishya (aphrodisiac), Balya (Tonic), property and acts as Rasayan.
Shuddha Gandhak: Gandhak is also known as purified sulphur, is a non-metallic solid element which possess numerous health benefits such as laxative, alterative and mainly pacifies vata dosha.
Method of Preparation
Take 1 part of purified mercury and 2 part of purified Sulphur. Make a kajjali
Do bhavna of Eranda Mool kwaath and Nirgundi patra swarasa (Decoction of castor roots and extract of horseshoe vitex leaves) and do frolement for next 2 days.
Make a ball structure of that kajjali and put them in an earthen pot which is closely tight with another pot.
After drying, they were kept in baluka yantra and cooked with the help of cow’s dung.
Take out that medicine form pot next day and do frolement
Again do nirgundi patra swaras, eranda mool kwatha and chitrakmoola kwath bhavna and do frolement for next 2 days.
Make a fine powder after drying and kept in glass jar safely.
Medicinal Properties
Anilari rasa has an analgesic property. It pacifies vata dosha and hence gives relief from various vataj pains. Shuddha parada and Shuddha Gandhaka acts as a digestive, appetizer and analgesic and hence useful in RA and OA patients. They pacify all three doshas but are mostly effective in pacifying Vata dosha.

Indications
Pacifies Vata dosha and hence effective in all Vata disorders such as sciatica, osteoarthritis, paralysis, ano rectal pain etc.

Dosage
2 tablets twice a day with honey or lukewarm water.

Cautions
It should be taken under medical supervision as it contains Parada and gandhaka
Avoid in Pregnant and lactating women
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



147. Navayasa Churna
Reference – Bhaishajyaratnavali pandurogadikara 22.
Introduction
Navayasa Churna is an ayurvedic formulation which consists of herbs with iron bhsama. The name of the choorna itself reflects its preparatory meaning. Nava means nine (i.e. nine ingredients) and ayas means iron. Iron is very essential for oxygen transport, blood formation and body temperature etc.

Ingredients
Shunti (Zingiber officinalis)
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis)
Pippali (Piper longum)  
Maricha (Piper nigrum)      
Musta (Cyperus rotundus)  
Vidanga (Embelia ribes)
Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanicum)  
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)  
Vibitaki (Terminalia bellirica)
Loha bhsama (Iron oxide)
Method of preparation
Take all ingredients expect loha bhsama up to 10 grams and loha bhsama up to 90 grams.

Now powdered all the ingredients separately and mixed together in a given proportion.

Dose
One gram with honey or ghee, two times a day after meals.

Indications
Anemia
Diabetes
Piles
Skin problems
Jaundice
Contraindications
Over dose can cause the problem of gastritis.
Take under medical supervision.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


148. Saptamrita Lauh – Benefits, Usage, Indications and Dosage
Reference – Bhaishajya Ratnavali
Introduction
Saptamrita Lauh is an ayurvedic formulation. This formulation is prepared from the mixture of minerals and herbs. This formulation is used to treat the problems related with stomach and eyes.

Ingredients
Loha Bhasma – Iron calx
Mulethi (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Triphala – Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Vibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica) and Amalaki (Emblica officinalis)
Method of Preparation
Take all the ingredients up to 10 grams.
Take the ingredients mulethi and triphala.
Powder the ingredients and mix with loha bhsama.
Your formulation is prepared.
Medicinal Properties
Saptamrita Lauh is rich in Iron content. It is a herbomineral formula which are used to treat eye ailments, digestive disorders, anemia etc. It is prepared by Iron calx, Licorice and powdered myrobalans (Emblica officinalis, Terminalia chebula and Terminalia bellirica). These ingredients help in managing eye disorders effectively since it contains Iron calx (Bhasma) as ingredient. Apart from that, it is also helpful in managing anorexia, vomiting, gastritis, fever, tiredness, and fatigue, difficulty in urination, bloating, edema and inflammation. It has anti-inflammatory properties. It balances Pitta dosha in body. Myrobalans are rich in antioxidants and have antibacterial, anti-viral and anti-cancerous properties. It is also known to cure cataract and it is rich in many polyphenols, Vitamin C, and flavonoids. Licorice comprises of glycosides known as glycyrrhizin and glycyrrhizinic acid, saponins, flavonoids and isoflavonoids, bitter principle (glycyrmarin), volatile oil, amino acids, amines (choline, betaine, asparagine). Iron calx is full of minerals and nutrients. This formulation is used to manage anemia by increasing the blood level.

Indications
Iron deficiency
Vomiting
Gastritis
Anorexia
Bloating
Fever
Vision related problems
Inflammation
Swelling
Dose
250 to 500 mg, one to two times a day, before or after meals, with honey, ghee or milk.

Contraindications
Stomach upset due to over dose.
Avoid in pregnancy and lactation.
Take the medicine under doctor’s prescription.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.



149. Saptasaram Kashayam
Reference: Sahasrayogam
Introduction
Saptasaram Kashayam is a very famous Ayurvedic medicine in liquid form. It is also known as Saptasara Kwatha, kashaya etc. It is used in the treatment of hip pain. It is made of seven herbs. Hence the name Saptasaram. It is made of seven herbs, hence, the name. It is hugely used in curing hip pain, low digestive power, constipation, menstrual ailments etc. it balances Vata.

Ingredients
Varshabhu (Boerhaavia diffusa)
Bilva (Aegle marmelos)
Horsegram (Dolichos biflorus)
Castor (Ricinus communis)
Sahacara (Barleria prionitis)
Shunthi (Zingiber officinale)
Agnimantha (Clerodendrum phlomidis)
Method of Preparation
Clean and coarsely grind all the herbs and put them in water and boil it till it reduces to 1/4th. Remove from heat and let it cool. Filter the decoction and store it in tinted bottles.

Medicinal Properties
Saptasaram Kashayam is an Ayurvedic medicine available in the herbal decoction form. It is used to manage the various problems like lower back pain, constipation, low digestion power etc. To resolve the digestive complications this medicine works in an amazing way. It possesses the cooling properties which help to pacify the aggravated pitta doshas. This helps to manage the various digestive problems like bloating, flatulence, heartburn, indigestion, acidity, nausea, vomiting etc. To relieve the problem of constipation, this medicine works well as it helps in easy passing and softening of stools. Saptasaram Kashayam is considered as an effective medicine to resolve the spleen disorders like hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, jaundice etc. It stimulates the secretion of bile. It helps in the detoxification of the liver and supports the healthy liver functions. Anti-inflammatory action of this medicine works well to alleviate the pains in body like back pain, hip pain etc. moreover it is a good medicine to manage the pain, stabbing burning due to nerve damage in neuralgia and many more other related problems.

Indications
Digestive disorders
Constipation
Backache
Flatulence
Bloating
Angina
Spleen ailments
Prostatic hyperplasia
Dysmenorrhea
Neuralgia
Dosage
12 to 24 ml mixed with equal amounts of water and consume it before or after meals as prescribed by the doctor.

Contraindications
There are no reported side effects as such but it should be avoided during pregnancy.
Over dosage might cause diarrhea.
Self-medication is discouraged.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.


150. Balahatadi Thailam (Oil)
Reference: Sahasrayogam, Tailayoga Prakarana 43
Introduction
Balahatadi Thailam is an herbal oil, used in Ayurvedic treatment of headache. This medicine is formulated based on Kerala Ayurveda principle.

Ingredients
Paste made from fine powders of:-
Chandana – Santalum album
Amaya (Kushta) – Saussurea lappa
Yashti – Licorice – Glycyrrhiza glabra
Taila – Oil of Sesamum indicum
Decoction prepared from:-
Bala – Sida cordifolia
Hata – Emblica officinalis
Amruta – Tinospora cordifolia
Mudga – Green gram – Vigna radiate
Masha – Black gram –  Phaseolus radiates
Method of Preparation
Fine paste is made from the fine powder of 1-4 ingredients. Decoction is prepared from 5-9 ingredients. Mix all the ingredients to oil to make Balahatadi Thailam.

Indications
Headaches such as migraine
Dizziness
Sleeplessness
How to Use?
Apply it over the forehead and scalp once or twice a day or as advised by Ayurvedic doctor.

It is also used in Ayurvedic procedures like Shirodhara, Shiropichu, Shirovasti etc.

Side Effects
There are no known side effects with this product.
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
Note:- This is pure classical Ayurvedic medicine and should be strictly consumed only after prescription of an Ayurvedic doctor and to be taken under medical supervision only.

1. Home Remedies for Acne
Acne is an inflammatory situation of the hair follicles and sebaceous glands. These are one of the most dangerous nightmares of every woman. It is characterized by lesions, which erupt all of a sudden on the face, chest, shoulders, neck, back and other parts of the body. Pimples, blackheads, whiteheads are some of the common forms of acne. This happens mainly due to the irregular eating habits and dietary practice. Constipation, gastric ailments, physical inactivity, stress, excess consumption of tobacco and alcohol are some of the other causes of acne.

Useful Home Remedies
1. Brown Sugar
Brown sugar acts as a natural exfoliator. It helps to get rid of dirt, dead cells, sebum and all the substances, which give rise to pimples. 3 tsp of brown sugar is mixed with 1 tsp of honey. It is applied all over the face in circular motion. Let it dry for 15 minutes and afterthat wash it off.

2. Neem
Neem has anti-biotic, anti-septic, anti-microbial, blood detoxifying properties. It acts as an astringent. It imparts cooling and soothing impact on the skin. This helps to get rid of acne. Apply the paste of the neem leaves. Keep it for 15 minutes. Wash it off.

3. Potato
Potato is yet another effective home remedy for acne. It removes grease, dirt, sebum and excess oil off the skin. It also reduces puffiness under the eyes, marks of acne and blemishes. However, potatoes must be applied on a regular basis to get effective results. Apply slices of potato on the acne and experience effective result.

4. Cinnamon
Cinnamon has anti-microbial, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal and anti-viral properties. This prevents the formation of acne since it fights off the microbial organisms, which give rise to acne and pimples. Grind some cinnamon. Mix the powder with gram’s flour. Apply the paste on the acne. Keep for 15 minutes and then wash it off.

Apart from these home remedies, there are some useful tips as well.

Tips
Always wash off the face with clean and cool water to remove the unwanted dirt, grease and prevent acne.
Drink a lot of water.
Maintain a healthy dietary habit
Practice a hygienic lifestyle
Follow these home remedies and the tips to get rid of acne and look beautiful.



2. Home Remedies for Allergies

Allergy refers to an overreaction by our immune system in response to exposure to certain foreign particles.

Allergens are allergy producing substances which include pollens, dust mites, some food articles, animal proteins and some specific medications.

There are various types of allergies people are suffering from like asthma, chronic sinusitis, chronic rhinitis, chronic cough, sneezing, eczema, skin rashes etc.

Home remedies
1. Tulsi (Ocimum sanctum)
Tulsi is known as holi basil. It posses antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, antibacterial and immunomodulator properties and widely used in different allergies. It naturally enhances immune system and provides stamina to fight ailments.

2. kumari (Aloe vera)
It is most notable plant which has many healing benefits. Aloe Vera is used for the health benefits. It is used topically for conditions like burns, irritation, dryness, sun burn. Aloe Vera is also used orally in conditions like constipation, Allergy, asthma, Cold, Cough etc and also used for enhancing Immune system, Digestive system, Urinary system, Respiratory system.

3. Amla (Eemblica officinale)
Amla fruit has number of health benefits on respiratory tract system, GIT, cardiovascular system etc. it is richest source of vitamin C and contains other vitamins and minerals also. It takes care of all the ailments and improves eye sight. It is an effective laxative with haritaki and babhitaki (Triphala).

4. Katuki (Picrarhiza kurroa)
Katuki or kutki are the same name for katukrohini. It is an excellent herb for liver. Katuki herbal remedies are formulated to improve liver functions naturally that also aids in good metabolism. Katuki preparations are recommended to improve digestion and to remove toxins out from the body.

5. Neem (Azadirachta indica)
Neem acts as anti-allergic, anti-inflammatory and blood purifier. Extracts of neem are beauty enhancing as well as immunity booster. It’s naturally antibacterial and antifungal too. Also used in other diseases like Diabetes, Obesity, Cancer, asthma, chronic cough and so many other ailments.

6. Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera)
Ashwagandha is Rasayana that provides stamina to the body and it has been proved very effective in asthma, bronchitis and lukoderma as well. It enhances immunity and relieves stress, tensions and other mental problems.

7. Haridra (Curcuma longa)
Also known as Curcumin and turmeric. It’s used in wound healing. It acts as a powerful anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory. Turmeric extract helps in fighting cancer, diabetes, and heart diseases. Among other benefits it is also very good anti-bacterial, Anti-viral and anti-fungal too. Haridra is used externally as well as internally. It is considered to be very helpful in managing asthma in beginning stages and skin allergies as well.

Here Planet ayurveda presents you an allergy care pack that includes Praan rakshak churna, Aller- G care capsule, Curcumin capsule and Tulsi capsule for easy convenience.



3. Home Remedies for Anemia

Anemia is defined as a decrease in the amount of red blood cells or hemoglobin in the blood. The decrease in the count of the hemoglobin decreases the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood. This eventually leads to anemia. There are various types of anemia. Some of them are megalo-blastic anemia, sickle cell anemia, hemolytic anemia and many others. Some of them are transmitted genetically over the generations. While others are caused due to the nutritional deficiency of Vitamin B12 or folic acid, lack of iron and many others. A person, who is anaemic will be pale in appearance and will show the symptoms of fatigue, tiredness, and shortness of breath, gasping and many other signs.

Home remedies for Anemia
Home remedies are extremely useful and beneficial and helps to get rid of the various signs and symptoms of anemia. It also helps to cure the disorder right from the roots.

There are certain home remedies to treat the situation of anemia. Some of them are described below:
1. Apple-beetroot juice
Beet is highly rich in potassium, fiber and Vitamin B12 and apple is an abundant source of iron. The combination of these two ingredients serves to be an effective home remedy for anemia. Add 1 cup of apple juice with 1 cup of beet juice. Add some spoons of honey to it. Drink the mixture daily two times. This home remedy is extremely beneficial for getting rid of anemia.

2. Spinach
Spinach is rich in Vitamin B9, A, C and E. It also contains the minerals, calcium, fiber and beta carotene. All these ingredients make this dark green leafy vegetable highly effective home remedy for anemia. Include spinach to your regular diet and get away from anemia.

3. Tomatoes
Tomatoes contain a lot of Vitamin C and lycopene. These components help to absorb the iron consumed. This is useful for the individuals, who are suffering from anemia. Consume 2 tomatoes daily. You can consume in the form of juice or can include in your daily diet.

4. Pomegranate
Pomegranate is rich in carbohydrate, fat, protein, fiber, potassium, copper, iron, calcium, sugars and a lot of vitamins. It increases the hemoglobin count in the blood and helps in steady blood flow in the body. The various symptoms of anemia like dizziness, weakness, exhaustion can be very easily cured with the consumption of pomegranate daily.

Follow the home remedies and bid adieu to anemia and stay healthy !!


4. Home Remedies for Appendicitis

Appendicitis is the disorder, which is characterized by the inflammation of the vestigial organ, appendix. There is an outgrowth of the tube shaped sac, which is attached to the large intestine. This may occur in both the genders and in any age. The individual facing appendicitis may experience chronic pain in the abdomen. This may be accompanies by constipation, nausea, diarrhea, vomiting or indigestion. This inflammatory disorder occurs due to the accumulation of excessive toxic materials in the caecum. This leads to inflammation of the appendix, which makes the organ swollen and inflamed. This then becomes a medical emergency.

But, to treat the situation right in the beginning, there are certain home remedies. These remedies are highly effective and help in handling the situation effectively.

Effective home remedies for appendicitis
Some of the home remedies highly useful are discussed below:
1. Fenugreek
Boil 2 tsps of fenugreek seeds in a cup of water.
Strain the mixture. Drink it once daily.
This is highly effective to treat appendicitis easily.
Fenugreek has a lot of medicinal as well as herbal properties.
It prevents the accumulation of the waste products in the caecum and flushes out the toxins from the body.
2. Yogurt
Another important home remedy of appendicitis is yogurt. It also has a lot of properties, which helps to cure the problem of appendicitis.
Add 2 tbsps of yogurt to a cup of water and drink it once on a daily basis.
One can add roasted cumin and thyme seeds in it for better results.
This treats the inflammation and pain to a huge extent.
3. Tulsi
Tulsi is wonderful herb in fever.
Make decoction with fresh tulsi leaves.
Have twice daily.
4. Mung beans
Mung means or green grams are also highly effective home remedies for appendicitis.
These are generally eaten raw in the morning.
Well drained sprouted beans can also be consumed.
These help to deal with appendicitis quite easily.
5. Ginger
Ginger has a lot of medicinal properties.
It is anti-inflammatory, anti-stress, detoxifying in nature. Include ginger in your regular diet.
It provides relief from the various symptoms of appendicitis like pain, nausea and vomiting to a huge extent.
Mix 1 tsp ginger juice with half tsp turmeric and 1 tsp honey.
Have this mixture daily 2 times.
Or Consume raw ginger or add in curries.
This helps to reduce swelling and feeling of vomiting/nausea as well.
Follow all the home remedies. These are very helpful to get rid of the inflammatory condition. These fight off this painful, inflammatory disorder to a huge extent.


5. Home Remedies for Ascites

Ascites is defined as the physiological disorder, which is characterized by the accumulation of fluid in the body, especially in abdominal cavity. This occurs, when the liver fails to function properly. Cirrhosis of liver is a major reason for Ascites. It needs to be treated in proper time. Else, it may lead to some dangerous disorders like colon cancer, liver cancer, pancreatic cancer, organ failure, etc. This complication is classified in two major groups on the basis of the accumulation of fluid in the abdominal cavity.

Here are the important home remedies for ascites. These are extremely effective ad beneficial.
Reduce intake of salt.

Useful home remedies for Ascites
1. Punarnava
This is best herb known for water retention.
Take its powder of dried leaves, available at herbal store.
Consume 500 mg with water twice daily.
Or make juice of fresh leaves and consume in the quanity of 5 to 10 ml twice daily.
2. Fenugreek
Fenugreek is a wonderful remedy for Ascites.
Soak fenugreek seeds all throughout the night.
Strain the mixture Drink the solution in the morning in empty stomach.
It helps to fight away the ailment easily.
This is because of the various anti-microbial properties of fenugreek.
3. Garlic/onion
Garlic and onion have several healing properties.
These are anti-inflammatory, antiseptic, anti-biotic, anti-microbial, anti-bacterial, anti-viral and anti-fungal in nature.
Consumption of raw garlic and onion help in eliminating the problem of ascites to a huge extent.
Or make paste from fresh few cloves of garlic and onion, have 1tsp daily. You can mix this in water, consume as you are comfortable.
4. Bittergourd
To get relieved from the condition of Ascites, consume bittergourd.
The bitterness of bittergourd helps in removing the soreness related to Ascites.
Make juice of bittergourd.
Consume the juice three times on a daily basis.
This is highly effective and provides a tremendous solution to Ascites.



6. Home Remedies For Atopic Dermatitis or Eczema
Introduction
There are many skin conditions which can make your life miserable. Though all of the skin conditions have the potential to make anyone’s life miserable but the skin conditions which are affecting the children as well makes the situation worse. One Of such conditions is atopic dermatitis also called eczema. This condition results in dry skin along with itching. Itching further results in inflammation. Eczema is a condition which does not define a person living with it. But it can make you do a lot of changes in your life so that you can stop having the break. In this content you will find some interesting home remedies for atopic dermatitis or eczema along with tips of do’s and don’ts.

Causes Of Atopic Dermatitis or Eczema
Modern explains that the ectopic dermatitis or eczema is related to alterations in the genes. This thus affects skin capacity to protect. It results in weak barrier function thus results in less ability of skin to hold moisture and provide protection against bacteria, irritants, allergens and environmental factors such as tobacco or smoke.

In other cases, which are free from any type of gene alterations, develop this condition due to too much bacteria on the skin. Especially staphylococcus aureus. This bacteria displaces the helpful bacterias over skin and disrupts skin barrier function. There is one other cause of this and it is the general weak skin barrier function which triggers the immune system response resulting in inflammation of skin. The condition is not contagious.

If understood from the angle of ayurveda then this condition arises due to the faulty diet and lifestyle and in children it is due to beej dushti kar bhava. It is called as vicharchika in Ayurveda and is due to impaired digestion along with aggravation of pitta dosha.

Moving further in this context let’s discuss some fruitful home remedies for Atopic dermatitis or Eczema.

Home Remedies For Atopic Dermatitis or Eczema
Finding perfect home remedies for atopic dermatitis is really important and a very tough nut to crack. Because obviously one is scared that anything may cause some reaction on the skin. That’s why while suggesting some home remedies for atopic dermatitis we need to think twice. The remedies mentioned in this content are fruitful and will not cause any harm to your skin. They will also help in managing symptoms. The remedies for Atopic dermatitis or Eczema are as follows:

1. Remedy One – Coconut Oil: The universal saviour
Application of coconut oil is a natural home remedy and it is available to almost all the people. This oil has antibacterial and antifungal properties thus provides effective results in atopic dermatitis. Due to its moisturising properties it is effective in reducing inflammation and discomfort. It also helps in balancing the pH of skin and thus can help in reducing down the inflammation over skin as well.
In a study it was found that coconut oil increases the amount of filaggrin in skin cells. Filaggrin brings together the structural proteins in the outermost skin cells to formtight bundles, flattening and strengthening the cells.

2. Remedy Two – Phototherapy: Sunlight is a boon
People who are suffering from atopic dermatitis or eczema are guided to have a sun bath in the early morning hours. The body or the affected parts must be exposed to early morning sunlight. It is the source of Vitamin D and vitamin D helps in the reduction of inflammation. Thus increases the body’s ability to fight against various bacterial infections.

That’s why phototherapy or sun rays are the real boon for human kind.

3. Remedy Three – Application of Cow’s ghee
Cow’s ghee is mentioned as the best pitta shamak or pacifier in Ayurvedic science. Cow’s ghee helps in pacification of localised pitta dosha and thus show impressive results.

Now the question arises how and when to apply?

Cow’s ghee is applied on the affected site after warming and melting it down. Once melted it can be applied on all the affected sites, even on the face and hence relieves itching and inflammation fast.

Cow’s ghee is nourishing and moisturises the skin quite well. On top of that you don’t have to worry about any type of side effects.

4. Remedy Four – Aloe vera Gel: Magical Gel
As we all know aloe vera gel is quite famous for its impressive properties. Aloe vera is nourishing, gets rid of dryness and itching felt on the skin. Moreover, it also helps in reducing the recurrent appearance of eczema in children and adults. Aloe vera gel as a remedy can be used in both adults and children plus gives fruitful results.

5. Remedy Five – Application of Magic Mixture: Cow’s Ghee and Haldi
The cow’s ghee benefits are already being mentioned above and the benefits of haldi we all are aware of. Haldi has an anti-inflammatory effect and reduces redness as well. When haldi powder is mixed in the warm cow’s ghee, a magical mixture is prepared. This can be applied twice daily so as to reduce itching and swelling in the localised area.

Do’s and Don’ts for Atopic Dermatitis
The do’s and don’ts in this case is divided into two categories one is lifestyle related do’s and don’ts and the other is diet related do’s and don’ts.

In lifestyle, One should avoid exposure of dust and other allergens. The allergens can be pollen, fungal spores, house dust mites, insect venom and many others. One should take care of himself/herself.

Sleep wake cycle is to be maintained.
Soft cloths should be preferred for wearing
Take care of digestion as well
Avoid sitting for long hours in front of the blower etc
In Diet, All types of citrus things are to be avoided

By products of milk are to taken with care
Milk should not be consumed
Sources of vitamin A and Vitamin D are to be consumed
Red and green chillies are to be avoided as well
Add Apples, broccoli, cherries, blueberries, spinach, and kale in your diet
Avoid most likely allergens like peanuts, strawberries, gluten and other things


7. How to Treat Acute Pancreatitis in Ayurveda?
Introduction
Home Remedies

Grahani or the seat of Agni (fire), is the name given to pancreas in Ayurveda. The burning of the pancreas is called Pancreatitis. Initially the imbalance between Pitta & Vata, is the main cause of this deterioration process to begin in the digestive fluids, which are placed in the pancreas. In chronic stage also shows some disturbance. The pancreas is the one that secretes enzymes that are always ready to combat with toxins present in the body, causing various infections. It also governs the digestive system, manufactures insulin hormones and teaches the body on how to absorb sugar by it. Pancreas might be tiny in size; it is significant for digestion and hormone producing glands of the whole body.


Mild disturbance can happen anytime, but go unnoticed as these are taken care of by the body itself. If it is severe, then it can create an emergency. You need to rush to your nearest hospital, get admitted and ask for treatment from the doctors. They tell you, a surgery needs to be done or not. At complex situation, you have to spend lots of money and time. The situation gets tough for you. A weak pancreas can cause diabetes and digestive disorders. Don’t panic, we believe in ‘when the going gets tough, the tough get going’.

Home Remedies for Acute Pancreatitis
We have home remedies for you, which will help in keeping you fine in a natural way, once and for all.

1. Turmeric
Turmeric is responsible for curing dozens of diseases. Turmeric has anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial, anti-cancer and anti-oxidant features and these can be beneficial when dealing with pancreatitis. Molecules like cytokines cause inflammation in the body and these are tossed off by curcumin, an ingredient of turmeric. It helps in curbing cytokines, TNF-a etc. This is reduced to cut short their role in various molecular mechanisms. Curcumin also helps the PPAR-y, which has anti-inflammatory features in the cells. This process reduces the inflammation to a great extent, making turmeric to rejuvenate the health of pancreas and it starts functioning normally.

2. Indian Gooseberry (Emblica Officinalis in Latin)
Except its anti-oxidant features, it is a rich source of vitamin C. Gooseberry helps in chasing out the free radicals that cause inflammation to expand, and injure pancreas making it look awry. 3 to 6 grams of Gooseberry is enough for the day, to keep the pancreas in proper shape. It has been the primitive medicine of Indians since time immortal. Studies show that it can be used to save the un-balanced pancreas, halting the pancreatitis to strike you.

3. Dandelion Root
This herb is a great remedy in healing the injured pancreas, especially it eradicates its cancer cells. It also helps in elevating the digestion of fats, gives a push to the production of bile. It just kills the cancer cells, while never bothering the other cells. Dandelion tea is amazing in expelling the toxins from the intestines and helps in rectifying the health of already injured pancreas tissues.

4. Spinach
Spinach boosts your health and helps in eradicating lots of diseases. It has huge quantity of iron and vitamin B in it. These are important for Pancreas to preserve the health. So to live life in a healthy way, eat it in a bulky way. It can be eaten in various dishes that you have along with your daily meals. You can also try adding Spinach to your salads or when it is stir-fried with garlic, it proves to be more beneficial.

5. Yogurt
Yogurt is very low in fats and a nice source of probiotics. It also has good bacteria, which helps in keeping the immune and digestive system functioning properly. It will be much better if you select yogurt that has no sugar in it. You can eat it along with your daily meals or eat it just like a snack to enjoy its various benefits.

6. Sweet Potatoes
According to Ayurveda, the food that resembles the shape of pancreas is the one that is maximum benefits and sweet potato is the one. It governs the sugar level in the body. It has lots of GI food, which means that it helps in releasing the sugar in a proper manner to the body. It means the sugar gets released in a slow manner, thus it is helping the pancreas not to worry. Sweet potato lessens pancreas stress and might be singing Bobby McFerinn’s ‘don’t worry, be happy’.
Sweet potato along with other veggies like corn, carrot is also beneficial.

7. The Allium Vegetables
All the family of allium veggies like garlic, onions and fenugreek has lots of arginine, selenium, flavonoids, oligosaccharides and sulfur, when all these combine, they keep the health of pancreas intact. The garlic should be eaten in raw or crushed condition to avail the maximum benefits. Just peel off 2 cloves of garlic and consume them with a glass of lemon water. If you don’t like the taste, add a little honey to it. And Veggie soups are also an excellent source to keep your pancreas in a healthy shape.

8. Haritaki
Haritaki, is an herb that comes from the family of Terminalia Chebula plant, it isn’t much popular. Studies have proved that it can be beneficial to cure pancreatitis and cancer tumors simultaneously. It prevents cancer cells to grow and does apoptosis (natural death of cancerous cells). It has no side effects and when consumed, it reduces the sugar level by 43.2%, a precious asset for controlling diabetes. You can have aarogyavardhini vati and navkarshik churna, both are Ayurvedic products to cure your acute pancreatitis.

9. Olive Leaves
These leaves have nutrients that detoxify the blood. The free radicals spread and cause damage to the pancreas, which brings diseases and lowers blood pressure. Olive leaves have an ingredient called oleuropein and oleic acid, which is highly anti-inflammatory, eradicating all the free radicals. If consumed regularly, it reduces the pain and swelling of the pancreas, making it rejuvenate from its sufferings.

10. Sattvik diet
Try having a sattvik diet, which consists of fresh organic vegetables, fruits, whole grains, nuts, herb based oils, honey, molasses, lentils, beans, dairy products like milk and ghee. All these should be prepared in a jolly mood otherwise these will not be able to show you their benefits. All should be prepared in a tranquilized environment and in a happy mood in the kitchen. Ayurveda says that Sattva is the authentic quality of spiritual virtue and serenity, obviously creating joy, awareness, intelligence, virtue and a very sharp and clear mind.

Still Indian Ayurveda has suggested 2 foods that should never be rejected, Gooseberry juice and buttermilk. Take all energy fluids and avoid anything containing alcohol.
If you don’t get the benefits you are seeking, go to an expert who can guide you better.


8. Home Remedies for Alzheimer Disease

Alzheimer’s disease is a form of neurodegenerative disease. This disease is very devastating and is growing its popularity these days. It is linked to the various parts and cells of the brain, including the plaques and the tangles. This disease is the result of acetylcholine metabolism. However, the major cause of this disorder is yet unknown.

Loss of memory, anxiety, cognitive impairment, agnosia, abstract thinking, apraxia are the initial symptoms of this disease. Behavioral changes, exhaustion, pneumonia, ulcers are the symptoms of the advanced stage. This disease eventually leads to death.

Effective Home Remedies
1. Sesame, Pumpkin and Sunflower Seeds
These contain a lot of essential nutrients, which are highly required for the functioning of the brain cells properly.
Consume all these seeds as it is with water
Or you can make powder half to 1 tsp of each and mix in milk.
Have this drink every day.
These form an effective home remedy for Alzheimer’s disease.
2. Turmeric
Curcumin in turmeric is a great anti-oxidant which boosts brain tissues
It also prevent the clumping of beta amyloids in the brain.
Add half tsp of turmeric in a glass of warm milk.
Drink every night
3. Mandook parni
This herb is also known as gotu kola in hindi.
You can take pure gotu kola’s dried powder in 500mg quantity.
Consume with water twice daily after 20 mins of meal.
This wonderful herb helps to imrprove blood circulation and makes a wonderful home remedy for Alzheimer disease.
4. Ashwagandha
Ashwagandha is known as withania somnifera.
Which is an excellent herb to boost stamina.
It provide nutrition to brain cells as well effectively
Take 1 tsp of its dried powder in a glass of warm milk to drink every day.


9. Home Remedies for Angina

Angina is defined as the pain in the chest region. This is caused mainly due to the blockage of the coronary artery. Other major causes are the atherosclerosis, improper contraction of the cardiac muscles and lack of oxygen in the heart.

It is defined as one of the important symptoms of some complications related to the cardiovascular system, especially the coronary artery.

Symptoms
Breathlessness
Chest Pain
Weakness in left arm
Numbness
Discomfort and tightness of chest
Pain in the shoulder and neck
Nausea
Patients suffering from Angina must modify their dietary habits and lifestyle.

Useful Home Remedies
There are some effective home remedies to treat this painful condition.

1. Arjun
 Arjun is wonderful herb for all heart problems.
It helps to improve blood circulation and prevent accumulation of toxins.
Take powder of Arjun bark powder in 500 quantity and have it with water twice daily after meal.
Or you can boil fresh bark of Arjun tree in 400 ml of water, drink when 100 ml remains.
2. Lemon
This is one of the simplest home remedy for the angina patients.
It prevents the accumulation of cholesterol.
It is advised to include lemons in the daily diet of the patients suffering from Angina.
Or mix half of lemon in a glass of Luke warm water to have in the morning.
3. Garlic
Garlic has many medicinal properties.
It can cure various cardiac ailments effectively.
Consume 2 cloves of raw garlic daily in the morning empty stomach.
You are sure to get effective results.
4. Coriander seeds
Coriander acts as a natural diuretic and improves the heart functions.
Boil 2 tablespoon of coriander seeds in a glass of water.
Drink after cooling twice daily.
Tips
Stick to a healthy diet
Avoid fried and high fat foods
Exercise regularly



10. Home Remedies for Arteriosclerosis
Arteriosclerosis is defined as a process, which is characterized by thickened arterial walls in the human body. This happens mainly due to the deposition of the cholesterol in the arterial walls. Arteriosclerosis is also known as Atherosclerosis. It poses huge threat on the functionality of the heart. Also, the cardio-vascular system is highly endangered and the process of blood circulation is severely affected. It may also become a life-threatening issue.

The major causes of arteriosclerosis are lack of balanced diet, sedentary lifestyle and emotional stress. This disorder leads to stroke, blood clot, paralysis, memory loss and even death.

Effective home remedies to treat arteriosclerosis
Here are some home remedies, which are highly effective to treat this dangerous condition of arteriosclerosis. These are as follows:
1. Arjun
Arjun – Terminalia arjuna is wonderful herb for heart and all its complications.
You may get arjuna tree in your surroundings, collect bark and make powder.
Consume in 500 mg quantity two times a day after meal.
Or boil its bark in water to make fresh decocotion, drink twice daily.
2. Honey
Honey is highly recommended for people suffering from cardio vascular disorder.
It has a lot of therapeutic properties, which help in the effective functionality of heart and other related body organs.
1 tsp. of honey early in the morning in empty stomach works wonders to treat the chronic situation of arteriosclerosis.
Or you can add 1tsp honey in 1 glass of warm water along with 1tsp lemon juice.
3. Garlic
Garlic is also known for its tremendous medicinal properties.
It contains anti-inflammatory, anti-stress and many other properties.
It prevents the deposition of cholesterol in the blood vessels.
It also prevents the normal working of the circulatory system.
Garlic must be included in daily diet either in raw form or in cooked form to reap its benefits.
Have in early morning empty stomach for better results.
4. Turmeric with milk
Add half tsp of pure turmeric in glass of milk to consume daily.
Practice this home remedy at regular basis.
5. Parsley
Parsley is another important component, which helps in the treatment of the arteriosclerosis.
It strengthens the vascular system of the body and the arterial walls and blood capillaries.
It helps in maintaining the blood vessels in the healthy condition and alleviates the symptoms of various cardiological problems effectively.
Besides these home remedies, it is important to carry out some amount of physical activities on a daily basis. Also, drinking a lot of water is highly recommended.



11. Home Remedies for Asthma

As it is said that breathe healthy to stay healthy, Ayurveda is exploring itself throughout the world to help people in safe and gentle ways. Here we are going to discuss about Asthma and helpful Asthma home Remedies.

What is asthma?
Asthma is a type of allergy that causes airways to swell and lead to wheezing, constant cough, shortness of breath and production of extra mucus.

Asthma triggers vary from person to person and can include:
Allergic reactions to some specific food items like ladyfinger, banana, curd, peanuts, freezer items etc.

Airborne allergens such as pollen, dust particles, animal dander etc.
Air pollutants and irritants like dust and smoke.
Physical activities like jogging.
Stress and some emotions.
Effective Home Remedies
1. Amla with Honey
Mix one teaspoon of Indian gooseberry powder with one teaspoon of honey.
Have this every early morning for better results.
2. Garlic
Boil 10 cloves of garlic in a glass of milk.
Drink after straining when one fourth remains.
Practice this home remedy for a month.
3. Turmeric
Turmeric is used in wound healing.
It acts as a powerful antioxidant and anti inflammatory.
Mix half tsp in a glass of warm milk and have every day.
4. Longpepper, dry ginger and black pepper
Powder made from longpepper, dry ginger and black pepper is called trikatu churna.
It is very effective in respiratory tract infections like cough, cold, running nose, asthma etc.
It can be taken half to 1 tsp mixed with honey two to three times daily.
This helps to release phlegm out and clears the channels.
Tips
Avoid fried, processed foods and eating late at night.
Don’t consume food items that has tendency to produce phlegm like rice, milk, cheese, sugar, curd etc.
Have hot water sip by sip.
Wrap yourself and avoid exposing to cold breeze that can aggravate symptoms like cough, wheezing etc.
Practice Pranayam (Anulom and Vilom) under an expert’s observation.


12. Home Remedies for Alcoholism

Are you addicted by alcohol? Are you trying hard to get rid of alcohol? Is it true that your social life always keep on revolving around alcohol? The consumption of too much alcohol affects the liver, heart and brain of the individuals tremendously. It also leads to several severe stomach ailments and gastric related abnormalities. However, moderate consumption of alcohol is not at all a problem. It becomes a severe problem, when you get addicted to alcohol. This situation is alcoholism.

It is a chronic disorder, when a person loses control over him and cannot resist himself at all from consuming alcohol. There are several home remedies available, which help to treat alcoholism. Some of them are given below.

Useful Home Remedies
1. Grapes
Grapes are the active materials of alcoholic drinks and wines. So, alcohol can be ditched quite easily with this natural ingredient, grapes. It is advised to consume as much grape juice as the mind wants to drink. You will very soon remove the habit of alcoholism. If required, consume grapes in every alternate 4 hour. This forms a superb home remedy for alcoholism.

2. Cayenne
Cayenne is a very common spice used in almost every Indian household. Cayenne, if consumed in juice form reduces insomnia, anxiety and irritability. It increases the appetite and lowers the urge to have alcohol. It also helps to get rid of hangovers. Thus, one can try Cayenne to get rid of alcoholism.

3. Dates
This is yet another superb home remedy for alcoholism. Drop some pieces of dates in warm water. Rub these dates in the water gently for some time. Then drink the liquid. Drink it twice or thrice daily to expect effective result.

4. Omega-3 Fatty Acids
There are certain fishes like tuna, trout, sardines, which are rich in Omega-3 fatty acids. These prevents the cravings for alcohol and helps to get rid of alcoholism.

Besides these home remedies, there are some tips as well.

Tips
Drink a lot of water
Have healthy balanced diet
Have enough sleep
Practice physical activities and exercises
These tips along with home remedies are some of the effective ways to prevent alcoholism. Stay healthy and live longer.


13. Home Remedies for Amnesia

Amnesia is a neurodegenerative disorder. This condition leads to total forgetfulness. People forget faces, names, numbers and events. Trauma, infection, disease, consumption of alcohol or drug are the major causes of the occurrence of Amnesia. This is generally treated with psychotherapy. However, this varies from individuals to individuals depending on the situation. There are certain home remedies available, which help to treat the situation effectively.

Useful Home Remedies
1. Walnuts
This is helpful for alleviating the problem of memory loss.
It is effective in curing various types of mental and psychological disorders effectively.
Consuming 20 grams of walnuts regularly helps to treat amnesia to a huge extent.
2. Milk
Milk has a lot of health benefits.
It contains several minerals like calcium, which help to strengthen the memory power of the individuals.
Milk forms an essential home remedy for amnesia.
Drink 1 glass of warm milk every night.
You can add 1tsp of almond powder for better results.
3. Cumin seeds
The use of cumin seeds is another valuable home remedy for dullness of memory.
Mix 3 grams of cumin seed (black preferred) with 2 tsp of pure honey.
Take once a day preferably in the morning.
4. Almonds
Almonds are wonderful in this case
These are packed with many essential nutrients needed for healthy brain.
Eat 5 to 8 soaked almonds in the morning after peeling off.
Practice this home remedy on daily basis.
5. Apples
Apples have vitamins and minerals like phosphorus, potassium. This is highly effective in treating amnesia. Have an apple with a cup of milk containing a tsp of honey.

6. Black Pepper
Black pepper has a lot of medicinal properties. It is anti-septic, anti-microbial, anti-biotic and blood purifying. Grind 5 pepper seeds. Mix it with a tsp of honey. Consume the mixture two times daily to get rid of amnesia.

7. Berries
Blueberries, strawberries are abundant sources of nutrients. These nutrients help to enhance the power of memory and prevent the loss of memory. It is suggested to consume berries on a daily basis in the breakfast. This will work wonder for treating amnesia.

8. Oranges
These are another wonderful home remedy for treating amnesia. Oranges contain a lot nutrients, which include Vitamin C. Orange also contains anti-oxidants and serve to be a good remedy for boosting memory power and preventing loss of memory.

Apart from these, it is very essential to grab proper rest, drink a lot of water, carry out some physical activities and maintain a healthy lifestyle to eradicate the complications of amnesia and lead a healthy life.

Tips
Opt for balanced diet
Always chose natural diet with fresh fruits and vegetables
Drink lot of water
Go for exercise and walk daily
Practice yoga and meditation under an expert


14. Home Remedies for Anti-Aging

Premature ageing has become a major issue these days. A lot of people have fallen victims to this serious concern. Apart from health and internal body structure, looks and appearances of the individuals are also greatly affected. Especially in this beauty focused world, premature ageing is really a nightmare. Fine lines, age spots, wrinkles all along the face are some of the important characteristics of premature ageing.

Major Causes of Premature Ageing
Addiction to intoxicated items like drugs, alcohol, tobacco and many others
Lack of sleep
Exposure to UV radiation
Signs and symptoms of Premature Ageing
Hair graying
 Hair fall or baldness
Fine lines
Wrinkles
Dull complexion
Home Remedies of Premature Ageing
1. Honey
Honey helps to keep your body hydrated by retaining the moisture.
 It also moisturizes the skin parts and prevents the formation of acne.
 Apply a fine layer of it over the skin of face every day for half an hour.
 Wash and clean with soft cloth.
2. Egg White Mask
Egg helps to hide the lines under the eyes, removes wrinkles and restores the elasticity of the skin to a huge extent.
It keeps the skin tight and makes you look young and beautiful.
Take white/transparent part of egg in a bowl.
Apply all over the face fingers gently. At least for 20-30 mins.
You can practice this remedy on hair also, which will work as a conditioner.
Wash and clean with soft cloth.
3. Potatoes
Potatoes help to remove pigmentation, dark spots, blemishes, sun burns and marks effectively from the skin.
It also helps to treat the fine lines and wrinkles.
Peel and cut the potato in slices.
Apply over the face for few minutes.
Wash and clean with soft cloth.
4. Coconut Oil
Coconut oil tightens the sagging skin and removes wrinkles and fine lines effectively from the facial skin.
It is one of the best natural products for anti-ageing.
Apply coconut oil every night on the facial skin, on scalp gently.
Wash in the morning with lukewarm water.
Practice this home remedy at least twice a week.
Tips
It is always recommended to have a diet full of antioxidants.
Apply sunscreen to prevent the exposure to the harmful ultraviolet radiation.
Limit the consumption of processed food and sugar.
Always keep your body hydrated.
 Keep away from drugs, tobacco and any other intoxicated items. 


15. Home Remedies for Arthritis

Arthritis is characterized by joint inflammation. The patient can experience the sensation in the hips, back, knee, feet and other parts of the body. Numbness and stiffness of some body parts are also the characteristic symptoms of this disorder. It also results in tremendous pain, inflammation and redness. There are certain home remedies available for treating the arthritic condition.

Effective Home Remedies
1. Apple Cider Vinegar
 The apple cider vinegar is rich in several vitamins and minerals like potassium, calcium and magnesium.
This strengthens the muscles, bones and the joints.
This also eliminates the accumulation of the toxic materials in the tissues and the joints.
This serves to be an effective home remedy for treating arthritis.
Add 2 tablespoon of this in a glass of water and have every day.
2. Mustard Oil
 Mustard oil is a superb home remedy for treating pains and inflammation.
It improves the blood circulation within the body and helps to get rid of the harmful substances of the body.
Heat some amount of mustard oil in a small bowl.
Then add same amount of onion juice to it.
Gently rub the mixture on the aching joints.
It provides tremendous relief from the pain.
3. Cinnamon
Cinnamon is an essential way to treat swelling and pains.
Add one tsp of honey to a ¼th tsp of powdered form of cinnamon.
Mix it in warm water.
Consume the mixture daily on empty stomach.
This mixture can also be used as a paint or ointment to provide relief from the inflammation and pain.
4. Garlic
Garlic makes another wonderful home remedy for arthritis.
One can have it raw or cooked as per the preference.
5. Sesame seeds
 Soak 1 tsp. of black sesame seeds in a quarter cup of water and keep overnight.
Drink the same water and chew the sesame seeds also early in the morning.
Tips
Carry out physical activities and exercises under an expert.
Drink ample quantity of water every day.
Maintain a balanced diet.


16. Home Remedies for Athlete’s Foot

Athlete’s Foot is also called Tinea pedis. It is an infection of the feet, which occurs due to the trichophyton fungus. This microorganism leads to itching, redness, cracking, scaling of the feet. It also affects different parts of the body resulting in red, round, painful, itchy, flakes and scaly patches all across the body. Men are more affected by this fungal infection.

If not treated properly, this infection can spread in various parts of the body as well. There are certain natural home remedies available, which help to treat the situation.

Effective Home Remedies
1. Garlic
Garlic has a lot of medicinal properties. It is anti-microbial, anti-fungal, and anti-septic in nature.
Take few cloves of garlic to make paste, apply locally twice daily for few days.
And just consume some cloves of garlic every day.
You can keep the fungal infection at bay.
2. Yogurt
 Yogurt contains the active bacteria, acidophilus.
It provides a tough fight to the trichophyton fungus.
Consume one bowl of fresh yogurt every day with meal.
It prevents the occurrence of Athlete’s Foot to a huge extent.
3. Lemon
 Lemon also contains a lot of nutrients, especially Vitamin C.
Make a solution of lemon water.
And apply it on the infected feet.
You are bound to get fruitful results in a very short period of time.
4. Marigold
To make an ointment, chop some fresh flowers, and add it to coconut oil.
Heat lightly and allow it to cool.
The ointments are excellent remedy for athlete’s feet and other skin infections.
Tips
Keep the feet dry and clean
Wear breathable sandals or shoes
Apply talcum powder on the feet
Change socks twice daily.


17. Home Remedies for Baby Cough & Chest Congestion
Introduction
Normally, cough lasts up to two weeks and exposure to germs etc helps in building immunity to the baby. Chest congestion is also very common in the babies and this causes some serious problems in the babies. Chest congestion and coughing is similar and very often seen in babies because babies catch colds more easily. Their bodies produce extra mucus from their nose and their airways get blocked. As in babies excessive production of mucus is there and also their airways are small, so they are more prone to chest congestion and cough. The treatment for chest congestion and cough is basically suction, steam inhalation etc. Rapid breathing, coughing, difficulty in feeding, runny nose, sniffing, snoring, blockage of nose etc are some of the symptoms of cough and chest congestion in babies. Dry air inhalation, change in weather, infections (viral, bacterial), DNS problem, any kind of allergy, asthma problem, any upper respiratory tract infections etc are some of the causes of cough and chest congestion in babies. Medical history, physical examination, blood tests, X-ray etc are some of the diagnostic tests of cough and chest congestion in babies. Steam inhalation, antibiotics, and salt gargle is the main line of treatment. Nebulisation is recommended if severe cases are there. Home remedies are some of the clues and ancient ways through which we can improve our health and no medicines are added in these remedies.

Symptoms Seen In Babies During Cough And Chest Congestion
The symptoms of cough and chest congestion in babies are listed below but babies usually cries when they are having any kind of problem and some of the common symptoms are:-

Rapid breathing
Coughing
Difficulty in feeding
Runny nose
Sniffing
Snoring
Blockage of nose
Causes In Babies During Cough And Chest Congestion
The causes of cough and chest congestion in babies are listed below:-

Dry air inhalation
Change in weather (seasonal change)
Infections (viral, bacterial)
DNS problem (deviation in nasal septum)
Any kind of allergy
Asthma problem
Any upper respiratory tract infections
Diagnosis In Babies During Cough And Chest Congestion
The diagnosis of cough and chest congestion in babies is listed below:-

Medical history (any kind of previous allergy, infection etc)
Physical examination (any kind of deviation in nasal septum )
Blood tests (for checking any kind of infection)
X-ray (for chest congestion)
Treatment In Babies During Cough And Chest Congestion
The treatment of cough and chest congestion in babies is listed below:-

Steam inhalation
Antibiotics
Salt gargle
Nebulisation if severe
Home Remedies For Cough And Chest Congestion In Babies
Home remedies help in balancing the tri dosha in the body and helps in maintaining the healthy wealth as well as the health of the patient. These are the few home remedies which will be very beneficial for the babies with cough and chest congestion:-

Give the baby warm water baths as this will help in relieving chest congestion and helps the baby to feel little good. (warm water have effect which helps in clearing the pathway also)
Proper and regular feedings to the baby is very essential and also do check for the urine and stool output.
It is beneficial to add 2 drops of saline to the nostrils using a small syringe, this is very effective in cough related problems. (as helps in clearing the pathway)
Go for steam inhalation (humidifier or running  hot shower), it helps in reviving the chest congestion and cough problem.
Massaging babies’ nasal bridges, forehead, temples etc helps in reducing the congestion and helps in releasing excessive mucus. 
Usage of vacuum for cleaning pet hair, air purifiers, avoiding smoking near babies helps in this kind of problems. (to reduce the risk of any kind of infection)
Before feeding one can use gentle suction to clear the pathway.
Wiping excessive mucus with a soft, dry tissue or cloth.
Chicken soup is very effective in chest congestion and cough as it helps in reducing the excessive blockage and clear up the chest congestion too.
Giving plenty of fluids is very important as to be hydrated.
Regular Disinfection or cleaning of doorknobs, toys, sink handles, toilet flushers etc. (to reduce the risk of any kind of infection)
Honey is very effective in infection and sore throat and aids in relieving cough and congestion related problems.
Applying vaporub on nose and chest helps in relieving chest congestion and also aids in clearing the pathway.
While sleeping makes the baby it also helps in relieving the congestion and releasing excessive mucus.
Conclusion
In this article we discussed the cause symptoms of cough and chest congestion in babies and also the diagnosis and treatment of cough and chest congestion in babies. Some of the home remedies which are very beneficial in improving and managing the cough and chest congestion in babies, we discussed in this article. Hope you find this article helpful for you and it helps you to grab more knowledge regarding cough and chest congestion in babies. Ayurveda helps in preventing the disease with home remedies, dietary hampering and lifestyle modifications. Ayurvedic remedies help in balancing the doshas in the body and help in improving overall health of the patient. Ayurveda aids in maintaining the health of healthy patients too and relieves the symptoms of the disease.



18. Home Remedies for Bed Wetting
Bed wetting indeed is a vital problem, especially of small children and the infants. Bed wetting is the process, which involves passing of urine unknowingly especially during sleeping. This occurs because the infants have not yet developed the urge of urinating strong enough to awaken them from their sleep.

This problem goes away with age. However, to help your baby stop carrying out bed wetting, you can carry out the following home remedies.

Useful Home Remedies
1. Cinnamon
Cinnamon powder is one of the wonderful home remedies for bed wetting. Make your child chew the bark of cinnamon once all throughout the day.

2. Olive Oil
Heat the oil. Rub the oil on the lower abdominal region of your child and then massage it for some minutes when the oil is warm comfortably. This should be followed regularly for effective result.

3. Herbal Tea
An herbal tea of bearberry, oak bark and horsetail is highly effective in treating bedwetting in small children. Mix all the above mentioned ingredients in certain quantity. Add the mixture to boiling water. Cover the mixture and let it settle down. Give half cup of this tea twice daily one hour prior to sleep every day. You are bound to get result.

4. Cranberry Juice
This juice is extremely recommended for babies with bedwetting problem. Give this juice to your baby one hour prior to sleep. Continue doing this for a certain period of time on a regular basis to get good result.

5. Indian Gooseberry
Amla or Indian gooseberry helps to treat bedwetting effectively. Mix one teaspoon of pulp of Amla with some black pepper sprinkled on it. Give it to your child before sleeping.

6. Honey
Give your baby a teaspoon of honey before going to bed. One spoonful of honey can be mixed with milk and served to your baby in the breakfast. Honey acts as a wonderful home remedy for bedwetting.

Tips
Reduce the consumption of fluid in the evening
Make your child urinate in the bathroom prior to going to bed
Use pull-ups or diapers for your babies during the night.
Follow the tips and apply the home remedies. You can easily help your child prevent bedwetting.


19. Home Remedies for Bone Spur

The bones face a lot number of friction and degradation all throughout the life. When the bones outgrow, it gives rise to the situation, known as the bone spur. The growth usually takes place along the joints. The major reasons for bone spur are the abrasion, anxiety and invariable pressure. This takes place in the feet, heels, toes and on the shoulder as well. The symptoms of such situation are tenderness, pain, numbness, swelling and problem in walking. This problem can be easily treated with the help of the various home remedies.

Important home remedies for bone spur
Some of the effective home remedies for the bone spur are discussed below:
1. Milk
Milk has a lot of Vitamin D. It helps in strengthening the bones and muscles to a huge extent. Thus, consumption of milk regularly helps in providing Vitamin D to the body, This is an effective home remedy for bone spur.

2. Ice pack
Apply icepack alternately on the affected area. But, remember not too apply icepack directly on the skin. This may lead to frosting skin. Instead take some ice cubes and place in it freezer. Wrap the ice cubes in a cloth and apply the cloth on the area. Ice pack provides wonderful solution from pain, tenderness and inflammation.

3.Ginger
Ginger has anti-oxidating and anti-inflammatory properties. This helps in eradicating the pain, swelling and other symptoms of bone spur easily. It should be consumed on a regular basis to treat the acute condition of bone spur.

4. Apple cider vinegar
Apple cider vinegar is a superb home remedy for bone spur. A clean cloth should be soaked in the vinegar and wrapped in the affected area. This is kept for 10 minutes and then removed. This provides a lot of relief from the pain and the tenderness. This is a superb solution.

Besides these home remedies, the patient must follow the following tips:

Tips
Carry out physical exercise regularly.
Practice good posture.
Take adequate amount of rest.
Wear proper footwear, which helps in supporting the body properly.
All these tips and the home remedies are extremely helpful in treating the complication of bone spur away. Lead a fit life !!



20. Home Remedies for Bronchitis

Bronchitis is defined as the inflammatory disorder, which is characterized by swelling of the membrane inside the bronchial tubes of the lungs. This disorder may be acute or chronic. Excessive smoking, exposure to certain drugs and heredity play a huge role, which lead to bronchitis. This disorder is characterized by cough, breathing problem, chest pain, hoarseness, fever and loss of appetite. This respiratory disorder can be treated with the help of some of the wonderful home remedies.

Useful Home Remedies for bronchitis
Some of the effective home remedies for bronchitis are given below:
1. Ginger
Ginger has many medicinal properties. It is anti-septic, anti-inflammatory, anti-pyretic and immune-boosting characteristics. These are highly efficient in treating the situation of bronchitis effectively. It is also efficient in boosting the process of metabolism to a huge extent. This may be consumed thrice daily to get relief from the situation.

2. Onion
Onion has expectorant properties. It helps in liquefying the phlegm and prevents it from being formed further. One teaspoon of raw onion juice right in the morning helps in eliminating the symptoms of bronchitis and treats the disorder considerably.

3. Garlic
Another effective home remedy for bronchitis is garlic. It contains anti-viral and other anti-microbial properties. It also has anti-inflammatory properties. It is highly effective in treating the acute condition of bronchitis. Add some chopped garlic o a glass of milk. Drink it. This is highly beneficial.

4. Turmeric
Turmeric has a lot of medicinal properties. It is anti-inflammatory, anti-biotic and anti-microbial in nature. It is extremely effective to treat cough, cold and other symptoms associated with bronchitis. Add a tsp of turmeric in warm milk and drink it daily. You will definitely be relieved. However, people with problems of gall bladder stone, ulcers, acidity shall not use this home remedy.

5. Honey
Honey is a wonderful home remedy for bronchitis. It helps to treat cough, cold, inflammation naturally. It has anti-bacteria, anti-viral and other anti-microbial properties. It provides relief from the various symptoms of bronchitis effectively. Add one tsp of honey to a cup of tea and consume it on a daily basis.



21. Home Remedies for Back Pain

Backpain may be intermittent or may persist for a constant period of time. It may be chronic or sudden. The pain may give rise to piercing sensation or may be extremely dull. From the back, the pain sometimes, travel to the feet, legs, hands and arms as well.

The pain generally initiates in the muscles, bones, nerves and joints of the spinal cord. The pain may remain in a particular place or may travel on the various parts of the body. The situation may worsen, leading to complete numbness of some of the parts of the body.

Symptoms of Back Pain
Pain
Weakness
Tingling
Numbness
Useful Home Remedies
1. Ginger
Ginger has anti-inflammatory properties.
It provides relief from the pain and cures nausea and vomiting to a huge extent.
Ginger may be consumed in the form of tea
Or the paste of the ginger can be applied to the affected part of the back.
2. Poppy Seeds
These provide a wonderful relief from the tremendous pain, tingling and burning sensation caused due to back pain.
Make a mixture by grinding 100 grams of poppy seeds and mishri each.
Take two tsps. of the mixture daily two times with milk.
3. Garlic
Garlic has many therapeutic benefits.
Make garlic paste along with warm mustard oil, apply on the affected region of the back, it brings tremendous relief from the pain.
You can also consume two cloves of garlic every morning in empty stomach. You are bound to get relief.
4. Milk With Turmeric
Drinking milk on a regular basis helps to get rid of pain.
Milk has calcium, which is necessary for strengthening muscles and bones.
Better if you Add 1 tsp. of turmeric to the warm milk and drink it.Turmeric is known to have anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and immunombuilder actions.



22. Home Remedies for Beautiful & Shiny Nails

Nails are made up of a protein called keratin. Discoloration is often observed in the nails due to a lot of factors, which include lack of protein in the body, fungal infections, illness, brittle nails, nails with ridges and many more. We unintentionally often cause damage to the nails by biting off the cuticles or while washing off the utensils and clothes with hard detergents or many other circumstances. It becomes absolutely important to take care of the nails from the daily situations in order to maintain their beauty and shine.

Some of the essential home remedies for beautiful & Shiny Nails
1. Olive Oil
Olive oil has wonderful moisturizing action because it contains linoleic acid. It keeps the nails hydrated and prevent them from getting dried. Adding some drops of olive oil in warm water and soaking the nails in the mixture is a wonderful way to have beautiful, shiny nails.

2. Lemon
Lemon juice has bleaching property, which helps to remove the stains and make the nails beautiful. Lemon manicure is often recommended for this. 1-2 tsp of lemon juice is used to soak the nails. A mixture in prepared with vinegar and warm water. Then the nails are brushed with the mixture for a couple of minutes. You are bound to get amazing results.

3. Butter
Butter is a smooth substance, which imparts moisturizing impact to the nails. It also provides a many number of nutrients like calcium, magnesium, potassium, iron, zinc, vitamin A, vitamin B, vitamin C and vitamin E. Application of butter on the nails helps to make the nails look shiny, glossy and beautiful.

4. Coconut Oil
Coconut oil contains lauric acid, healthy fats, caprylic acid and Vitamin E. All these nutrients aid in strengthening the cuticles of the nails, moisturizing the nails preventing the formation of the hangnails and getting rid of cuticle infections and other fungal diseases.

5. Starflower Oil
This oil is extracted from the seeds of the Borage herb. They have anti-inflammatory properties and contain a lot of gamma linoleic acid (GMA). It also contain omega 3, salicylic acid, mucilage, resin, tannin, calcium, potassium nitrate, magnesium and many other essential nutrients. These prevent the nails from getting cracked and make them beautiful and healthy.

6. Avocados
Avocados contain anti-oxidating properties. It possesses phytonutrients, vitamin A, B, D and E, potassium and essential minerals, which make the nails healthy and shiny. It is recommended to include avocados in your meal daily and enjoy beautiful nails.

7. Yogurt
It possesses a lot of minerals like iron, calcium, zinc, vitamins A, C, D, E, K and proteins. It has anti-microbial properties, which help to protect the nails from bacterial and fungal infections. Also, it contains hydrochloric acid, which is one of the important nutrients for maintaining shiny nails.

Tips
 Eat balanced diet
 Exercise regularly
Practice yoga and meditation



23. Home Remedies for Blocked Arteries

Blocked arteries condition is that medical condition, where the fats get deposited in an artery. This restricts the flow of blood all throughout the body. This poses threat to the circulation of oxygen to various parts of the body as well. This situation is also referred to as the Clogged Artery condition. Several complicated disorders like diabetes, arthritis, obesity can lead to this situation. Also, lack of physical activities, too much smoking and drinking alcohol also give rise to the blocked artery situation. Several consequences of such situation are Coronary artery blockage, Periphery artery disorder, heart attack or cardiac arrest. Symptoms include dizziness, anxiety, loss of appetite, angina, breath shortness, weakness, sweating, leg pain, numbness and loss of vision.

Home Remedies for Blocked Arteries
1. Garlic
Garlic has a lot of medicinal properties. It widens the blood vessels. It provides improvement to the blood circulatory system. It lowers the level of LDL cholesterol and reduces chances of cardiac arrests.

Take some chopped garlic cloves.
Add them to a cup of milk.
Boil it.
Let it cool for a few minutes.
Consume it before sleeping.
2. Turmeric
Another important home remedy is turmeric. It contains curcumin, which has a lot of medicinal properties. It is a wonderful home remedy to treat blocked artery condition.

Take 1 tsp of turmeric powder.
Add it in a glass of milk.
Add little honey to the solution.
Stir well.
Consume it once or twice on a daily basis.
Also, use turmeric in regular diet.
3. Ginger
It possesses shogaols, gingerols and other essential chemical compounds, which have the potential to resist cardio-vascular complications effectively.

Take 1 tsp of grated ginger
Add them to a cup of hot water.
Steep for 5 minutes.
Strain the solution.
Add some amount of honey to the solution.
The ginger tea is ready.
Consume the tea twice or thrice on a daily basis.
Follow these simple home remedies and lead a healthy life !!



24. Home Remedies to Boost Stamina in Men

Having lack of stamina or feeling tired may be a simple symptom of getting exhausted. However, poor stamina or loss of stamina may be due to some simple causes or may even be a severe cause.

Major Causes of Lack of Stamina
Low level of testosterone hormone
Adrenal Fatigue
Hypoglycemia
Low level of HGH
Emotional instability
Work pressure
Disturbed sexual performance
Financial matters
Home affairs
Disturbed relations
Home remedies for Low Stamina
Here, we will discuss about some of the essential home remedies, which will help an individual to enhance the stamina to a huge extent.

1. Follow a Balanced Diet
First and foremost, eating healthy food and maintaining a proper and balanced dietary habit are extremely essential to treat the situation. Consume food rich in Vitamin A and zinc to increase the production of the testosterone hormone and keep you physically active enhancing the stamina.

2. Regular Exercise
The sedentary deskbound lifestyle has taken away the capacity to do a lot of physical activities. Regular physical workout for a few minutes is extremely essential to maintain the stamina and increase it as well, if required.

3. Relax Yourself
This is yet another important natural treatment to make your mind free and relax to the full extent. A stable mental state is extremely crucial to increase the stamina. Go out with friends or make time for your hobbies so that you can enjoy and remain happy both mentally and emotionally.

4. Take Proper Rest
An approximate sleep of 6 to 8 hours is required to maintain the physical and mental health properly. An adequate rest will work wonder.

Opt for diet
The diet which is rich in onion, garlic, ginger, dried fruits, winter cherry, peaches, mangoes, eggs etc, As:

It increases the production of libido and improves the activity of the reproductive organs.
It enhances the stamina in men to a huge extent.
It cures spermatorrhoea, early ejaculation and impotency.
These enhance the power of sex.
It enhances libido, thereby, increasing stamina in men.
Tips
Alcohol should be strictly avoided as it could have the opposite effect.
Eat healthy.
Opt for yoga and meditation.



25. Home Remedies for Burning Urination

Burning urination is a major symptom of Urinary tract infection. It mainly occurs among the women. Due to the presence of the E.coli bacteria, this situation occurs.

Apart from the burning sensation, there are certain other symptoms, which include the following:
Pain
Difficulty in holding the urine
Change in the color of the urine
Nausea
Vomiting
 Fever
Home Remedies for Burning Urination
1. Baking Soda
Sodium bi-carbonate or baking soda helps to neutralize the acid present in the urine. This helps to reduce the burning sensation, making it less painful. However, do not take excess baking soda. This is because; it may disturb the balance in the intestinal region.

2. Cranberry Juice
Cranberry juice does not cure the situation. It helps to prevent the further recurrence, especially in women. Drinking 50 to 150 ml of cranberry juice daily is highly effective in treating the situation. However, this is of not much important in males. Also, it has some side effects.

3. Enhance the Intake of Fluid
More and more consumption of fluids, especially water, herbal tea and non-caffeinated drinks helps to flush out the toxic materials from the body. This helps to reduce the burning sensation while urinating easily. Also, it helps to prevent the occurrence of cystitis and any other urinary tract infections.

4. Put a Heating Pad on the Pelvic Region
To get instant relief from the tremendous burning sensation, applying a heating pad or any other warm compress on the pelvic region can be highly beneficial.

Apart from these home remedies, you need to follow some useful tips to stay healthy and get relief from such situations.

Important Tips
Avoid the consumption of the caffeinated drinks
 Urinate after having sexual intercourse
Maintain a healthy diet
Carry out some amount of physical activities and yogas every day
Avoid taking baths and instead, take showers
 Wipe from front to back with fresh pieces of wipes.
 Wash hands thoroughly
Try wearing cotton underwear
Do not hold the urine for a long duration of time.



26. Home Remedies for Bad Breath

Bad breath is medically known as halitosis. Bad breath odors differ from individual to individual depending on the situations and the causes.

Bad breath can cause obscurity in both your private and professional lives.

The major causes are the following:
Poor oral hygiene
Usage of tobacco
Strongly flavored foods like garlic and onions
Deficiency of zinc mineral
Medical situations like dry mouth, sinus problems, bronchitis, liver disorders, diabetes, kidney problems, other throat, nose and mouth complications
Certain medicines and drugs
Smoking.
Bad breath can give rise to plaque on teeth, yeast infections and dental caries
Mouthwash or mouth freshener can cure the problem temporarily.

Effective Home Remedies
Home remedy with unripe guava. It contains tannic, oxalic, phosphoric and oxalic acid, manganese, oxalate and calcium. It cures gum bleeding and prevents the occurrence of bad breath.
Parsley is also a superb home remedy for bad breath. Boil two cups of water and coarsely cut sprigs of parsley along with two whole cloves. Stir the mixture infrequently during cooling. Strain it and use as a mouthwash.
Spices form good home remedies for bad breath. A lot of spices like cloves, fennel seeds, anise seeds, which are frequently used in the kitchen are excellent bad breath removers. Chew them after having an odorous meal.
Consume pumpkin seeds or gourd seeds or cacao daily and remove bad breath. These have a lot of zinc, which prevents halitosis.
Chew carnation or peppermint for enjoying superior breath odor. These give a fresh and clean feeling to the mouth.
Add one tablespoon of apple cider vinegar to one-third cup of water and gargle this for approximately 20 seconds. Apple cider vinegar contains natural acids like maleic and acetic acid. These reduce bacteria inside the mouth.
Dissolve baking soda in water and wash the tongue with the mixture. This is an effective home remedy for bad breath.
Tips:
Drink a lot of water
Brush your teeth two times regularly
Scrape your tongue
Floss on a daily basis
Use a mouth rinse



27. HOME REMEDIES FOR BED SORES
Bed sores is defined as the open wound, which occurs in the skn. It is usually seen in the individuals, who always remain seated on a wheel chair or bed for prolonged period of time. The friction and pressure on the skin give rise to the bed sores. Also, people with paralysis, weakness or coma have the tendancy of getting infected with bed sores. Common symptoms are pain, skin lesions, skin irritations, itching, skin discoloration and many more.

Some essential effective home remedies for bed sores are the following:

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES
1. HONEY
Honey possesses antiseptic properties. It reduces itching, pain and risk of further infection.

Mx honey and sugar to form a thick paste.
Apply the paste externally on the infected areas and cover with bandage.
Do this process once regularly.
2. ALOE VERA
Take an aloe vera leaf. Cut it open and extract the gel out of it.
Apply this gel on the affected area.
Rub it for a few minutes.
Leave it to get dried and wipe with a clean cloth.
Carry out this process thrice on a daily basis to get relief from the painful symptoms.
3. TURMERIC
Turmeric is a wonderful herb, which helps to get rid of the bed sores. It has several healing an medicinal properties.

First the infected region must be cleaned with water.
The wound then should be covered with enough turmericc powder.
Then the area is covered with a bandage.
Carry out this process thriceona  daily basis.
You can also drink turmeric milk regularly twice to get benefitted
4. GOLDEN SEAL
Golden seal is another herb with tremendous antiseptic properties, which provides relief from the painful and itching conditio of bed sores.

Mix 1 tbsp of the herb with a cup of warm water and prepare the herbal tea.
Clean the bed sores with this tea at least twice on a daily basis.
These are some of the wonderful home remedies to treat bed sores.



28. Home Remedies for Boils

The skin infection, which initiates in the oil gland or a hair follicle is known as the boil. The skin becomes red color and it swells leading to a tender lump. After a few days, the lump turns white due to the formation of the pus underneath the skin.

Boils are caused mainly by staphylococcus germs which enters the sweat glands or hair follicles to present with painful red nodule along with burning feeling.

Home Remedies for Boils
1. Neem
Neem has anti-bacterial, anti-septic and anti-microbial characteristics.
It treats several skin infections effectively.
Make a paste of the fresh neem leaves and apply on the infection.
It is bound to get cured.
2. Turmeric
Turmeric has several therapeutic characteristics.
It has the blood purifying and anti-inflammatory properties.
Drink a glass of warm milk containing 1 tsp of turmeric powder every day.
The boils will have a high probability to get cured.
3. Onion
Onion possesses anti-microbial and antiseptic properties.
Take an onion slice. Keep it on the boil.
Wrap with a piece of cloth till the heat gets generated from the onion.
This will work wonder on treating the boil effectively.
4. Garlic and Onion
Garlic has a lot of medicinal properties like anti-allergic, anti-septic, anti-microbial properties.
Having minimum two cloves of garlic daily in the morning empty stomach provide effective results in treating boils.
Take fresh juice of garlic and onion, apply locally to ripen, break and evacuate the pus.
5. Betel Leaves
A betel leaf is gently warmed till it becomes soft.
It is then coated with a layer of castor oil.
Spread the oiled leaf over the inflamed part.
Replace every few hours.
After few applications, boil gets rupture and drain

Tips
Eat healthy.
Say no to fried and spicy foods.
Drink plenty of water.



29. Home Remedies for Cataracts

Cataract is basically an ailment, which occurs due to ageing. Clouding occurs in the lens of the eyes. This acts as the hindrance and does not allow clear view to the eyes. The eyes throughout the lives get exposed to the UV rays of the sun. This results in the formation of the free radicals in the eyes. This leads to cataract formation in the eyes. This situation is highly important in individuals, who are smokers or are affected by diabetes. Surgeries are available to remove the cataracts, yet there are some important home remedies available. These are extremely important for cataracts.

Effective home remedies for cataracts
Some wonderful home remedies for cataracts are given below. These are very effective and useful.
1. Carrot
Carrot is a rich source of Vitamin A. And, vitamin A is extremely helpful for maintaining the health of the eyes. Include carrot in your daily diet. Also, drink glasses of carrot juice on a daily basis. This will be helpful to treat cataract.

2. Garlic
Garlic has a lot of healing properties. Raw cloves of garlic help in the clearance of the vision. This also is helpful to treat the problem of cataract effectively. Consume raw garlic on a daily basis if you want to prevent the formation of cataract.

3. Almonds
Almonds are yet another wonderful home remedies for cataract. Let some almonds soak in water for the entire night. Then, peel them off in the morning. This can be consumed with a glass of milk. This helps to improve the eyesight, besides providing solution to the problem of cataract effectively.

4. Spinach
Spinach is a highly recommended home remedy for cataract. It has carotenoids. It helps to get rid of the complications related to retina and other eye problems. It forms a wonderful solution to treat cataracts effectively. Consume spinach regularly by including it in your diet.

5. Honey
Honey has the potential to get rid of the harmful infections. It contains anti-oxidants, which help to eliminate the various complications easily. Apply honey to the eyes just like eye drops. This works as a great remedy to treat the cataracts.

These are some of the superb home remedies to treat cataracts. Follow the remedies and stay healthy !!


30. Home Remedies to Reduce Cholesterol Level

Cholesterol is a yellowish, fatty substance, which is one of the essential ingredients of the body. Every person with high cholesterol level is vulnerable to stroke and heart attack. Cholesterol is generally measured in mgs per 100 ml of blood. It occurs with lipids in the bodies, known as the lipoproteins, which are mainly of two types – low density lipids (LDL) and high density lipids (HDL). The higher the ratio of LDL to cholesterol in the body; more is the risk of the damage of the arteries and chance of heart disorders. But, the presence of HDL in the body reduces the risk of cardiac disorders considerably.

Increase in the cholesterol level in the body is known as Hypercholesterolaemia.

Hypercholesterolaemia is caused due to several factors:
Genetics
Excessive consumption of milk and dairy products like butter, ghee, ice cream, cheese.
Too much consumption of red meat, white flour, eggs
Stress
Irregular smoking and drug addiction
Home Remedies to Reduce Your Cholesterol Level
1. Garlic
Garlic has many medicinal properties.
It can cure various cardiac ailments effectively.
Consume 2 cloves of raw garlic daily in the morning empty stomach.
You are sure to get effective results.
2. Arjun (TERMINALIA ARJUNA)
Arjun is wonderful herb for all heart problems.
It helps to improve blood circulation and prevent accumulation of toxins.
Take powder of Arjun bark powder in 500 quantity and have it with water twice daily after meal.
Or you can boil fresh bark of Arjun tree in 400 ml of water, drink when 100 ml remains.
3. Peepal (FICUSRELIGIOSA)
The leaves of the Peepal are used in the treatment of heart diseases.
 A decoction can be made with these leaves with water.
Boil till one fourth remains to drink after straining.
 Practice this home remedy for couple of days.
It is highly effective inclearing cholesterol and other toxins.
4. Ashwagandha (WITHANIASOMNIFERA)
his is wonderful herb for heart.
 Take 500 mg of Ashwagandha powder (you can get easily at your herbal store)…With glass of plain water daily 2 times.
 This helps to dilate blood vessels and removes toxins out.
5. Olive Oil
It is rich in antioxidants, which help to reduce the LDL and increase the HDL considerably.
One can use it for daily cooking.


31. Home Remedies for Constipation

Constipation is a painful condition, which is characterized by pain, bleeding at times and difficulty in passing stool. It may become a life-threatening issue. Low consumption of fiber, lack of proper consumption of liquid, dieting, endocrine and metabolic disorders like celiac disease, cystic fibrosis, diabetes, hypothyroidism, hypercalcemia and many structural reasons including anal fissures, colon cancer and psychological imbalance are the major causes of constipation.

Useful Home Remedies for Constipation
1. Triphala Powder
Triphala powder is combination of three fruits – Amalaki (Emblica officinalis), Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) and Bibhitaki (Terminalia bellerica).
Take 1 to 2 tsp of this at bed time before sleep with luke warm water daily.
Your whole ama or called toxins will be clear in the morning
You can practice this home remedies for couple of days as per the need.
2. Lemon
Lemon is a cleansing agent. It clears off the salt content of the intestine and aids in passing the stool easily and quickly.
Drinking a glass of warm lemon juice in the early morning relieves constipation.
It has detoxifying properties to the body.
It is a recommended home remedy for constipation.
3. Flaxseed
This is rich in dietary fiber.
It helps to improve digestion and other gastrointestinal complications.
These must be consumed with warm water half to one tsp early in the morning every day.
It is a marvelous remedy for constipation.
4. Spinach
Spinach helps to rebuild, renew and clean the gastro-intestinal tract of the individuals.
Make a mixture with 100 ml of spinach juice and similar quantity of water.
Drink this solution daily two times.
This helps to cure constipation effectively.
Besides these home remedies, consume all the fruits except banana and jack fruit to get rid of constipation.

Tips
Drink minimum eight glasses of water daily.
Do not consume foods containing white sugar, white flour and various processed food items.
Have proper sleep
Keep these points in mind to get rid of the pain and bleeding during constipation. Lead a healthy and happy life !!


32. Home Remedies For Cervical Spondylitis
Introduction
Spondylitis is a very irritating condition and painful as well. When the spondylitis hits your cervical region then it is called cervical spondylitis. Cervical spondylitis is a general term for age-related wear and tear affecting the spinal disks in your neck. These types of conditions affect your day to day work and make things really hard for you. Spondylitis is not a condition for weak people. Even spondylitis strands for; S- Strong, P- People, O- Overcoming a, N- Never ending, D- Disease, Y- Your L- life I- is T- Therefore I- Inspirational & S- Strong. In the following content you will come across some remedies that can be easily tried by the patient for relaxation in this condition. Moving forward we should discuss the causes of Cervical spondylitis.

Causes of Cervical Spondylitis
Modern science suggests that any type of spondylitis is due to an autoimmune process. That means, the body is killing its healthy cells by itself without knowing the exact cause for this reaction. From the angle of Ayurvedic science the condition is the result of ama dosha accumulation in the body which results in the blockage of micro channels thus causing conditions like spondylitis. Actually what happens is the blockage, which results in the blockage of the vata pathway and thus its aggravation happens. Once aggravated, it combines with each other similar properties. Now let’s come to the most important part, Home remedies for Cervical spondylitis and that is home remedies.

Home Remedies for Cervical Spondylitis
As we all know now, in this case the target area is the cervical region of the neck. The pain generally starts from the nape of the neck covering the entire entire neck and then radiating to the shoulders.This might cover the upper back region also. So,the home remedies in this case will be targeting these same areas.

1. Essential Oils
Some essential oils can be applied to relieve pain and stiffness in this condition. Essential oil of Cinnamon, eucalyptus, Lavender, peppermint and ginger.
In these essential oils lavender helps in best for relieving pain related to muscles and skeleton.
The pain related to stiffness can be overcome using ginger essential oil.
The black cumin oil helps in an achy feeling and provides relief quickly.
All of these are to be massaged with light hands without applying much of the pressure as pressure application can aggravate the pain. The pressure should be minimum and massaging should be gentle.

Later on, application of a hot towel (towel dipped in hot water and then squeezed) can be done so that the stiffness can be relieved.

Oil preparation can be done using various oils and other ingredients that can help in relieving pain along with stiffness.

2. Mustard Oil with Garlic Cloves
Add 2-3 cloves of garlic in hot mustard oil and let them heat. Once your garlic turns dark brown that means your oil is ready and you can apply it over affected areas. Same as essential oil this is not to be rubbed or massaged with pressure. Do soft, gentle massaging and thus the pain will be relieved.

Application of warm hot towel can be done in this case as well.

3. Sesame Oil with Black Cumin Seeds
Heat sesame oil and add 1 tsp of kalonji seeds or black cumin seeds in it. Heat it till the seeds are perfectly roasted in the oil and then remove the pan from the stove. Let it cool down and store in a glass jar of adequate quantity. Apply it every night. Obviously like other oils mentioned above this oil is also to be massaged gently without applying much of the pressure.

Application of warm hot towel can be done in this case as well.

Do’s and Don’ts In Cervical Spondylitis
It is better to take care of things which are to be done and which are to be avoided. Especially things regarding our diet and lifestyle. In cervical spondylitis, especially in diet, there is a certain category of food articles that are to be avoided. These include:

Milk and milk products
Chillies are also to be avoided
Heavy pulses like kidney beans, black lentils, Lobia, soya and others
In the case of lifestyle, many habits have to be modified. The lifestyle modifications includes the following:

Manage your sleep wake cycle because it will help in balancing the imbalance of vata dosha in the body.
Manage your time for a quick work out in early morning and before bed time Work on your digestion, you must not feel constipated or must not have incomplete evacuation.
Neck stretches are important: stretch your neck muscles after every half an hour of concentrated work on screen or off screen.
Stress less and keep yourself motivated.
Do pranayam and yoga as well.



33. Home Remedies for Cold Sores

Cold sores are defined as small lesions, which are filled with fluid and appear on various parts of the body, especially near the lips. These lesions often form clusters. And when they break, they form a crust on the left over sore. This is mainly caused due to the infection by the herpes virus. Exposure to sun, fever, hormonal changes and stress are some of the important causes of the occurrence of the cold sores.

Cold sores are contagious diseases and get easily transmitted via physical contact or sharing razors or napkins. Besides disrupting the beauty, these also cause pain and discomfort.

Home Remedies for Cold Sores
1. Ice
Applying ice on the affected area is very effective in treating the cold sores.
This prevents the bloating up of the sores.
Thus, prevents the further aggravation of the situation. Instead, it helps to reduce the intensity of the sores and treat it properly.
2. Lemon
Lemons contain antioxidants, Vitamin C and citric acid.
It is also effective in treating the cold sores.
Just soak some amount of cotton in lemon juice.
Apply it on the sore affected area.
You will definitely get positive result.
3. Garlic
Garlic has anti-viral properties.
It cures this situation instantly.
Make a paste of garlic.
Place the paste on the cold sore affected area.
It will pain tremendously.
But, you will get instant result in a very short period of time.
4. Honey
Honey heals cold sores at a much faster pace.
The medicinal properties it has prevents the breeding of the herpes virus.
It also helps to moisturize the lips and helps in healing faster.


34. Top 7 Home Remedies for Cough
Coughing is one of the most common health issue. It is body’s natural cleaning way to remove foreign materials from our body. Whenever our brain gets information of mucus or any other irritant in our throat or upper air passages, it immediately gives signal to our body to cough so as to remove that element as early as possible. However it protects our body but leave the chest aching as helps in clearing the large breathing passages from fluids, irritants, mucus etc. sometimes leads to aches in our upper body. Coughing can be due to hidden diseases such as allergic rhinitis, bacterial infection of upper respiratory tract, sinusitis, lung cancer, tuberculosis, asthma, pneumonia or reflex of stomach contents, viral infection, common cold, flu and smoking. Syndromes of cough includes itchy throat, chest pain and congestion. Instead of using cough syrups, one can try some natural treatments using readily available ingredients in kitchen.

Home Remedies for Cough
1. Turmeric
Turmeric is loaded with therapeutic effect on coughs, specifically a dry cough. It is a yellow colored herb with lots of medicinal properties. It is anti-inflammatory in nature, its curcumin aids in alleviating the chest congestion that flourishes in people suffering with chronic cough. Use of volatile oil extracted from turmeric for cough is also very promising in soothing cough by getting rid of phlegm.

Simply roast turmeric root and grind it into a smooth powder, mix the powder with water and honey. And here it is, the remedy is ready to take, drink it twice a day.
Moreover, one can make herbal tea also by adding one teaspoon of turmeric powder and one teaspoon of carom seeds to a cup of water, and boil it until water reduces to one-half cup. Add some honey and drink this herbal solution twice or thrice a day.
Alternatively, add equal amounts turmeric powder and black pepper powder in a boiling half cup of water. One can add few cinnamon sticks along with honey (one tsp.). Boil the solution for two to three minutes. Drink the solution daily until the condition improves.
Top 7 Home Remedies for Cough
2. Hot Milk with Honey
Honey appeared to be as effective as a common cough suppressant ingredient ‘dextromethorphan’. Since honey is cheaper and widely available, it might be worth a try.

Chest pain experienced from continuous coughing can be cured with honey mixed in hot milk, drink it before going to sleep. One can consume plain honey directly with water as it helps to soothe the throat and clears the mucus from the body.
One can go for another remedy as well made from the same ingredient. Add honey with holy basil (Tulsi) and take this twice daily.
Take equal proportions of Black pepper, Long Pepper and Ginger powders. Mix all and take this powder twice daily with honey for fast relief from cough.
3. Garlic
Garlic is known for its anti-bacterial and anti-microbial properties. It is used as a cough remedy since ages.

Crush some garlic and consume directly or with honey, or one can use in cooking also.
Take some crushed garlic, mix some honey and few drops of clove oil to it. Consuming it will help in sore throat relief.
Take four to five cloves of garlic with a teaspoon of oregano and some honey in a cup of water. Boil till it remains half. Allow it to cool to room temperature and drink it. This will help in breathing and dip other cough symptoms.
Boil two crushed Garlic cloves in a cup of milk. Boil till ½ cup of milk remains, make two equal halves and take one part in morning and one in evening.
Note: In case of acidity problems, this remedy is not advisable.

4. Ginger
Ginger, the most popular herb used in treating cough has lots of magical properties. Ginger bear anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial properties which kills the unhealthy bacteria. It aids to break up the congestion developed in the respiratory passages. Gingerol and zingiberene present in ginger helps to boost the immune system and even coats the esophagus to prohibit itchiness and irritation.

Directions to follow:-
Crush fresh ginger slightly. Put in a cup of water and bring it to boil. Drink this solution many times a day to get rid of sore throat, non-stop coughing and even congestion fast. One can add some lemon juice and honey to this for better results.
Alternatively one can chew fresh raw ginger on and off throughout the day to plunge the cough conditions.
5. Holy Basil
It is known as “Tulsi” in layman’s language. It is used in multiple ways in treating impotence, poisoning, dyspnea, vomiting, coughs, halitosis, backaches, respiratory diseases and even arthritis. The ancient texts of Ayurveda illustrate multiple use of Holy Basil in treating several diseases.

A tea made with holy basil leaves is a common primitive method to get relief from cold, cough and mild indigestion.
6. Cinnamon
Cinnamon is strong anti-inflammatory and anti-viral. It support healthy heart, healthy respiration, ignites the digestive fire and work for purifying the blood and even support healthy pancreas. It has the ability to digest Aama/toxins.

Directions:-
Take some honey and mix in cinnamon to taste. Take one spoonful as needed to stop cough.
Make a fine powder of cinnamon stick and consume with water.
7. Cloves
Cloves are packed with medicinal properties, has phenolic compounds such as eugenol and gallic acid, which are anti-inflammatory and anti-bacterial in nature. Cloves not only relieve a sore throat but also alleviate misery caused due to persistent coughing. It acts as a natural expectorant because of essential oil present in it, helps in clearing the respiratory passage.

Cloves also possess antibacterial properties and benefit to alleviate the pain occurred due to continuous coughing and sore throat. Cloves also helps to get rid of the itchy feeling which is common sign during dry cough.

Method to use:-
Take a clove with rock salt and chew it thoroughly to ease down the soreness and irritation of the throat.
You can even burn a clove and crunch it to get relief from a severe cough.
Moreover, Clove oil can also be used when mixed with honey, gives an amazing effect from recurring cough.
To recapitulate, these natural remedies are very effective in cases of coughs, even mild or chronic. One must try at home to get optimum results.



35. Home Remedies for Cholera

Cholera is a disorder, which is highly infectious. It is caused due to Vibryo cholera, the comma shaped bacterium. This bacterium enters the digestive tract of the individuals through contaminated water and food. This gives rise to acute diarrhea, abdominal cramps, too much thirst, low output of urine, dehydration, vomiting, palpitations, muscular cramps, weakness, restlessness, irritability and loss of elasticity of skin. Poor hygienic condition, undercooked food, lack of hydrochloric acid in the body and natural disasters can give rise to cholera. Cholera, if not treated in proper time may be life threatening as well.

Effective Home remedies for cholera
The important and effective home remedies for cholera are given below:
1. Onion
Onion is an effective home remedy for cholera. Onions have a lot of medicinal properties like anti-inflammatory, anti-diarrhea, anti-biotic and many others. It helps to get rid of thirst and restlessness. Add a pinch of black pepper to onion paste. Consume this mixture twice or thrice daily.

2. Cucumber Leaves and Coconut Water
Make fresh juice from the cucumber leaves. Mix the juice with coconut water. Mix the ingredients in equal proportions. Consume the juice twice daily. This provides tremendous relief from the disorder.

3. Lemon Juice
Lemon juice is yet another important home remedy for cholera. Consume one glass of lemon juice freshly prepared minimum two times on a daily basis. This helps to eradicate the symptoms and helps to get rid of the ill consequences of cholera to a huge extent.

4. Cloves with Water
Mix 4 grams of cloves to approximately 3 liters of water. Boil it. Then, let the mixture cool down. Consume the mixture after every 2 hours. This also prevents the occurrence of dehydration, prevents the feeling of excess thirst and helps to treat cholera significantly.

Besides these home remedies, there are certain tips, which should be followed.

Important Tips:
Maintain a healthy hygiene
Wash your hands properly before eating
Have a balanced diet
Drink a lot of water on a regular basis
Cook your food properly before eating
Follow the home remedies along with these simple tips and get rid of cholera to a huge extent.



36. Home Remedies for Common Cold

Common cold is the medical condition, which gives rise to discomfort and the patient feels very sick. It is commonly seen in individuals of various ages, genders and occupation quite frequently. The major cause of common cold is exposure to the seasonal variation in the climatic condition. It occurs, when the body gets exposed to harmful pollutants and cold virus. Heredity is also important while understanding the reason of common cold. It is characterized by headache, running nose, watery eyes, cough, fever, blocked nose and sore throat.

A lot of medicines are available in the market to treat the condition of common cold. However, people generally prefer the natural home remedies to treat such situation.

Effective Home Remedies for Treating Common Cold
1. Turmeric
Turmeric is known for its medical properties. It is antibiotic, antiseptic, anti-inflammatory and anti-microbial properties.
It helps to treat headache, nasal blockage and other symptoms of common cold effectively.
Take half tsp. of turmeric powder and mix in 1 tsp of honey.
Consume this twice daily.
2. Garlic
Garlic is also an important remedy in Ayurveda.
It has many medicinal properties.
Put some cloves of garlic in mustard oil and heat for some time.
After it gets Luke warm, massage the chest and the nose gently with the oil.
You are bound to get relief from the common cold.
The symptoms of sore throat, headache and aches will definitely vanish and the disease will be eradicated as well.
3. Tulsi
Tulsi is holy basil which is commonly found in every one’s home.
Put 4 to 5 fresh tulsi leaves in water and boil.
Strain and drink sip by sip.
One can prefer tulsi tea as well.
This is very effective home remedy when person has fever also with cold.
4. Ginger
Another effective home remedy for common cold is ginger.
Ginger pieces are done and boiled in water for some time.
Filter and add little sugar.
Have this decoction when it’s hot – sip by sip.
Ginger tea can also be prepared to get rid of cold symptoms.
Boil ginger pieces in water before adding tea leaves to make tea.
Follow the home remedies and lead a healthy life devoid of unhygienic complications !!


37. Home Remedies for Cracked Lips

“Cracked lips” is also known as the Chapped lips. This makes the appearance extremely unattractive and painful. Allergy, dehydration, deficiency of vitamins, smoking, exposure to extreme weather and sun, too much licking the lips can result in the formation of the cracked lips.

Major Signs of Cracked Lips
Some of the major symptoms of cracked lips are given below.
Redness
Tenderness
Dryness
Flaking
Sore lips
 Cracking
Useful Home Remedies
1. Aloe Vera Gel
It has a lot of medicinal properties.
Applying some amount of the gel provides relief from the pain, tenderness and sore lips.
It is yet another effective home remedy.
2. Sugar
Sugar brings back the natural softness of the lips by exfoliating the dead cells from the cracked lips.
Make a paste using 2 tsp of sugar with a tsp of honey.
Apply the paste on the cracked lips and let it sit for a few minutes.
Rub the paste on the lips gently to remove the dead cells.
 Wash it off with water.
3. Honey
Honey has anti-bacterial and healing characteristics.
It works as a wonderful moisturizer, which helps to soften the lips.
 Applying pure honey on the cracked lips many times in a day helps to treat the condition effectively.
4. Coconut Oil
Coconut oil protects the lips from the extremes of temperature like extreme dryness or coldness.
Just apply some amount of coconut oil on the cracked lips and keep them moist and soft.
5. Milk Cream
The milk cream contains a lot of fat, which acts as a wonderful moisturizer.
Applying fresh milk cream on the lips and leaving for approximately 10 minutes and then washing it off with lukewarm water is a wonderful home remedy for cracked lips.
 This helps to get rid of the problem effectively.
6. Water
Cracked lips may also be the result of dehydration. So, drink a plenty of water to keep the body hydrated.
 This helps to get rid of the toxic substances from the body, thereby getting rid of the cracked lips.



38. HOME REMEDIES FOR DEHYDRATION

The body needs to be hydrated to function properly and carry out the various metabolic activities effectively.

Dehydration leads to several complications like digestive disorders, dark colored urine, fatigue, watery mouth and eyes and premature ageing.

There may be several reasons for dehydration. And this can strike anybody of any age, gender and occupation.

It is important to know about the home remedies for dehydration to get rid of the chronic and acute consequences effectively.

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES FOR DEHYDRATION
1. BANANA
Banana has high water content.
It helps to restore potassium in the body, which gets vanished due to dehydration.
Thus, it helps to maintain the balance between the minerals and helps to prevent the various complications related to dehydration.
Some other fruits rich in water content are watermelon, strawberries and cantaloupe.
2. COCONUT WATER
Coconut water helps to restore the electrolytic balance in the body.
It keeps the body hydrated.
It contains a high amount of minerals, which helps to treat chronic dehydration easily.
It is also comparatively low in sugar and calories.
Thus, overall, coconut is highly effective to treat dehydration.
3. CHEESE
Cheese is a wonderful remedy for treating dehydration.
It helps to maintain the balance between the various minerals.
It restores the normal limit of potassium and sodium in the body.
This prevents the occurrence of chronic dehydration. And, it helps to keep the body hydrated and healthy.
4. YOGURT
One of the effective home remedies in getting rid of dehydration is yogurt.
Mix a tsp of fenugreek powder with yogurt.
Consume it on a regular basis.
This is highly useful to maintain the electrolytic balance the water content in the body of the individuals.
Besides, drink a lot of water daily to keep the body filled with water. Follow the above home remedies, avoid dryness of the body and get rid of dehydration.



39. Home Remedies for Diabetes

Diabetes is one among various ailments which has caught our body so badly that how it should be controlled with medicines that too without side effect is a very big question. Diabetes herbal cure with ayurvedic medicines has some magic to lower down the increased blood sugar naturally without leading any other complication.

Diabetes is a condition, where body fails to utilize ingested glucose which may be due to either lack of hormone insulin or insulin which is present is not able to work properly. Diabetes is a set of metabolic disorders where person has high blood sugar level. Diabetes is called as Madhumeha in Ayurveda and it is Yapya (difficult to manage).

Home Remedies for Diabetes
Basil or commonly known as Tulsi is an excellent antioxidants which lower the blood glucose level by increasing the insulin sensitivity. One can take either juice out of it every morning in empty stomach or can chew 3 to 4 leaves as it is for better results.
Fenugreek which is known as Methi in Hindi has abundance of benefits related to our health. During the process of digestion, amino acids present in Methi reduces the rate of sugar absorption from stomach and helps in making insulin by acting upon pancreatic cells.
Bitter gourd (Karela) Extracts are really amazing to lower down the blood glucose. Diabetic person can take it either in the form of juice or powder. One can cook curry mixed with other vegetables and take with bread also.
Cinnamon or known as Dalchini in Hindi is very capable in reducing blood glucose level by improving insulin sensitivity. Diabetic person can have tea flavored with cinnamon every morning or can take Dalchini powder half tsp every day for better results.
Aloe Vera detoxifies our body when taken every morning in empty stomach. Aloe Vera juice daily before meals helps you to control the blood sugar level which in turn keeps you free from diabetes.
Amla or Indian goose berry which is a rich source of vitamin C and has strong antioxidant. This is a special medicine to enhance the immune system and therefore preserve the health and well being of people. One can consume it either in the form of powder or juice.
Tips
Eat healthy with low fat and carbohydrate diet.
Avoid sugar in all beverages
Avoid junk food items
 Exercise regularly
Practice yoga and meditation



40. Home Remedies for Depression

Most common emotional disorder – Depression has become a common issue these days. Not only adults, teenage have also become one of the major sufferers of depression. The reasons for depression are highly different. However, genetics play an important role in the occurrence of depression. Teens face a lot of obstacles, which lead to depression to a huge extent.

The major reasons of depression are as follows:
Failure to cope with the problems
Stress
Peer pressure
Disturbing events
Anxiety
Relationship conflicts
Failure to accomplish goals
Genetics
There are various types of depression. Reactive depression, seasonal affective depression, biochemical depression are some of the major types of depression.

The common symptoms of depression are irritation, sleeping too much, headache, fatigue, difficulty in concentrating, suicidal thoughts, backache, digestive problem, loss of appetite, observable alterations in weight, self condemnation, feeling of hopelessness and helplessness, lethargic feeling, loss of interest in sex and many others.

Major Home Remedies for Depression
1. Garlic
Garlic helps to elevate the mood and it has a tremendous impact on the level of cholesterol.
So, garlic therapy can definitely have a wonderful impact in getting rid of depression.
Have raw 2 pods of garlic every morning empty stomach
Make paste out of 2 to 3 garlic pods and have with 1 tsp honey.
2. Ashwagandha
Ashwagandha is known as withania somnifera.
Which is an excellent herb to boost nervous system.
It provide nutrition to brain cells as well effectively
Take 1 tsp of its dried powder in a glass of warm milk to drink every day.
3. Sunflower seeds
Sunflower seeds contain selenium, which helps to get rid of depression to a certain extent.
Generally, people with low levels of selenium are prone to anxiety, depression and stress.
Have half tsp. of sunflower seeds powder along with I glass of milk daily.
Other foods rich in selenium are Brazil nut and fishes.
4. Cardamom
Use of cardamom has been proved useful in depression.
Powdered cardamom should be boiled in water and tea is prepared in the usual way.
This home remedy on regular basis treats the condition up to a huge extent.
Tips
Grab enough sleep
Consume a balanced diet
Carry out proper physical activities and exercises regularly
Also, drink enough water
Keep your mind relaxed
Practice meditation
Prevent alcoholism and any other addiction


41. HOME REMEDIES FOR DRY MOUTH

Dry mouth situation is the result of the decrease in the flow of saliva or modifications in the salivary composition. The major causes are depression, excessive consumption of alcohol, snoring, smoking and stress. Certain medicinal therapies also eventually give rise to the dry mouth situation. This situation is medically termed as “Xerostomia”.

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES
1. LEMON
Lemon juice has stimulating action on the saliva secretion. It also provides relief from the various signs and symptoms of this disorder.

Take a lemon and cut it into two halves.
Extract the juice of half lemon and add it to a glass of water.
Add some amount of honey to  the solution.
Drink this solution on a regular basis.
2. ALOE VERA
Aloe Vera has protective action in preventing the condition of xerostomia

Take an aloe vera leaf and extract the gel out of it.
Mix the gel in a cup of water.
Rinse the dry mouth with this juice for a couple of times regularly.
Also, you can apply the Aloe Vera gel with a cotton swab across the mouth. Keep for a few minutes and then wash with cold water.
This helps to get rid of the dry mouth condition to a significant extent.

3. GINGER
Ginger is highly effective in treating the condition of dry mouth. It has a stimulating action on the salivary glands and also helps in refreshing the condition ofo bad breath.

Cut a ginger into a few pieces.
Chew the raw pieces on a slower rate directly. Do this for a couple of times daily to enjoy the benefits.
TIPS
Consume a lot of fluid daily to prevent dehydration and dryness.
Quit smoking.
Gargle regularly with warm water wiith added salt in it.
Increase the intake of food items, which are rich in the water content.
Clean your toungue and teeth regularly.



42. How to Treat Dermatitis and Eczema with Home Remedies ?

Eczema is a medical problem that makes the skin of the patient irritated or inflamed. The most usual eczema is of the type atopic dermatitis. Mostly it is a disease that is allergic to many other diseases; it just carries along, like hay fever or asthma.

Eczema mostly affects kids, but is rare with the adults, about 3%. Most of the kids who get infected by this disease, come out of it by the time they attain the age of 10 years, but in some cases the symptoms keep coming back throughout their life. You can control this disease of eczema, if you get the proper treatment.

Ayurveda heals the diseases by the natural elements of our world, i.e. fire, air, water, space and earth. A cure is found mending your diet plans, herbal remedies and massages are done with special herbal oils. A qualified and experienced doctor easily recognizes the body type and gives the remedy according to your physical appearance. If you have a light symptom of eczema, you will be healed instantly, but if it is chronic or systemic, it might take some time. Better behave passionately, because if you are cured, this infection is never going to infect you for the whole life. Follow your ayurvedic doctor’s instructions precisely.

Home Remedies for Dermatitis and Eczema
Some home remedies are also there that can prevent eczema, as ‘prevention is always better than cure.’ We will discuss a few with you today:

1. Turmeric Powder
Lots of eczema healings require topical care and turmeric powder is a cure for dozens of diseases. It reduces the inflammation level of the whole body. It prevents the skin problems by its Curcumin powder, an anti-oxidant that deals with free radicals by maintaining a control over them. Consume a teaspoon of turmeric daily to reap in the maximum benefits. It has a unique flavor that goes well with rice, cooked veggies, pasta, noodles and everything that is cooked.

2. Coconut Oil
Coconut oil is made from the pulp of a coconut fruit, which is so frozen chilly that it cools down the inflammation in the skin. It can also be used as a natural moisturizer. It reduces the staph bacteria from the skin, thus preventing the infection from striking your skin. The person who suffers from eczema faces a cracked skin on the heels, allowing the bacteria to enter the body and deteriorate the whole process of recovery. Coconut oil makes the cracks disappear and moisturize the skin. Better use virgin coconut oil that is processed without any chemicals.

3. Sunflower Oil
It is extracted from sunflower seeds. It keeps the skin’s outer layer safe by moisturizing it and thus keeping all the bacteria out. It also hydrates the skin and minimizes the inflammation and itching. Gently rub this oil after having a bath, when the body is still moist. It doesn’t need to be diluted for use.

4. Humidifier
If you have the air in your house a dried one, meaning your skin will also get dry. During the winters it becomes drier as we keep heating up the things of daily use, which makes the moisture evaporate. Better put a nice humidifier in your house or room to avoid moisture leaking out. If moisture remains in your skin, eczema can’t dare to come near you and your skin remains supple.

5. Physical Movement
Physical movements have reached the minimal point these days. Everything has a remote and you just have to press a button to avail anything from anywhere. Begin exercising, not an intense one, but a mild one will help. Stress is everywhere these days, it boosts the breaking of eczema and exercise can make you lose the stress in moments you begin exercising. You can do swimming, jogging, walking or just play a game that requires physical movements. It will sure work as a stress buster and make you lose eczema.

6. Lavender Oil
Lavender oil can help you in retaining your moisturizer. Its aura is so vast that putting a few drops on your pillow can make you sleep like a baby. Its sweet and wonderful fragrance will make you dream sweetly. It will make you reach on cloud 9. You tend to forget about your worries and thus lose tension, giving space for eczema to vanish, making your skin attain the original form.

7. Sleep Sufficiently
A human being needs to sleep for 7 to 8 hours daily to keep up with the normal functions of doing routine chores. Even the brain needs some rest; it begins giving the abnormal signals if a person doesn’t sleep for 3 continuous days. When you sleep soundly, your skin doesn’t get frustrated and doesn’t crack, giving invitation to the bacteria to enter the body. The skin retains its moisturizer and remains supple, making you look smart.

8. Tea Tree Oil
First dilute the tea tree oil with olive oil. Put a few drops into a teaspoon of olive oil into your palm and rub your skin with the mixed oil, from where it has cracked. Rub this mixture several times a day. If your eczema has not become severe, you can find the cure in a few days, otherwise it may take some time in healing to the original level.

9. Aloe Vera Gel
Organic Aloe Vera gel has an abundance of anti-inflammatory and healing features. The itchy skin finds a fine cooling sensation and gets cured. You can grow an Aloe Vera plant in your garden. Pluck its leaf and peel off carefully, the gel appears. Rub it on your itchy skin and feel the coolness instantly. In a few days, it soothes the skin fully. Authentic Aloe Vera gel can also be found in your grocery store.

All these home remedies can be found in your kitchen, which can help in making your skin supple. It may take some time, better be passionate. Once you find the cure, you can keep using the remedy and never get infected again in the whole life. It doesn’t cost a fortune, to keep your skin supple. If these don’t get you the result you are seeking, a visit to your doctor becomes inevitable.



43. Home Remedies for Dry Skin
Dry skin is the common problem during the winter. Cold, dry air sucks out the smooth skin. This is caused since the body loses moisture content. Age, nutritional deficiencies, heredity, transformation of climate, detergent, hot showers and air conditioner are the major causes, which lead to dry skin.

The major symptoms of dry skin are scaly skin with redness, roughness, itching and wrinkling. It makes one look aged and elderly. These symptoms often lead to loss of confidence and individuality of the persons.

Effective Home Remedies for Dry Skin
1. Milk Cream
Milk cream contains lactic acid. This helps the dry skin to exfoliate. The soothing nature also helps to maintain the skin’s pH level and it acts as a superb moisturizer. A few drops of lemon juice mixed with the milk cream, if applied on the skin can work wonder.

2. Olive Oil
There are a lot of antioxidants and healthy fatty acids present in the olive oil. These help to provide soothing impact to the skin. This makes the skin fresh, lively and full of youthfulness.

3. Milk
Milk possesses soothing and anti-inflammatory characteristics. This helps to get rid of the dryness and itching sensation. Also, it helps the dry skin to exfoliate the dead cells and improves the capability to retain moisture. Also, it aids in lightening the complexion of the skin. A few drops of rose water added to a cup of milk and applied on the body helps to get rid of the dry skin effectively.

4. Honey
Honey has antioxidating, anti microbial and humectants properties. It is one of the best natural moisturizers, which help to treat the dryness effectively. It helps to retain the moisture in the skin, making the skin soft, moist and full of life. The various vitamins and minerals present in the skin help to enhance the health and glow of the skin to a huge extent.

5. Yogurt
This is yet another wonderful home remedy for dry skin. It has excellent skin hydrating, anti oxidating and anti inflammatory properties. It helps to provide a soothing sensation to the dry and itchy skin. It contains lactic acid, which helps the skin to get rid of the micro organisms effectively, thereby, maintaining a healthy skin devoid of dryness. Applying yogurt on the skin and massaging it helps in exfoliating the dead skin cells from the skin effectively. Also, mixing papayas with milk and applying on the various parts of the skin remove the dryness and make the skin refreshed and glowing.

Tips
Eat healthy
Stay active
Practice yoga



44. Home Remedies for Edema

Modern lifestyle, smoking, excessive intake of alcohol, hypertensions lead to several diseases and one of them is edema. Edema is swelling affecting the hands, legs and ankles due to accumulation of excessive fluid in the body. Patients suffering from conditions such as kidney and liver disorders, heart disease, lymph nodes inflammation, allergies, diabetes, pregnant women have symptoms of edema.

Noticeable symptoms of edema are :
Tissues swelling under the skin
Stretching, puffiness and dimpling of skin
Abdomen enlarge
Pulmonary edema symptoms include:
Wheezing, Coughing
Condition becomes critical when symptoms include:
sweating
Blood in cough
Pain in chest
Pale skin and fainting
Home Remedies for Edema
Home remedies are effective, simple and natural way to reduce swelling but with recommendation of doctor as some of them can be restricted in specific diseases.

1. Garlic
Is one of the home remedy that is natural diuretic to cure edema.
It flushes out toxin and water out of the body.
Consumption of 2 or 3 cloves in the morning are effective.
2. Dandelion Green Tea, Fennel Ttea and Corn Silk Tea
The leaves of dandelion herb are rich in vitamins and minerals, corn silk are thread like strands of corn rich in Vitamin K and fennel has spicy aroma.
To make tea, fresh leaves of dandelion, fennel or corn silk are kept in cup and boiled water is added and kept for few minutes.
Strain and drink 2-3 cups of one of this tea daily.
3. Coriander Seeds
These are rich in potassium making it useful for water retention.
These seeds are added to boiled water for 5 min.
Strain and consumed twice daily.
4. Barley
It is helpful in treating edema as it is a natural diuretic especially for pregnant women.
Barley is added to water, soaked overnight, strained and consume 2 glasses of barley water daily in the morning.
5. Flax seeds
Flax seeds are crushed into a powder and sprinkled over food.
Flax seed oil can also be applied to the affected area of the body.
Tips
Eat healthy, opt for a balanced diet and avoid excessive salt in your diet.
Stay active with recommended exercises.
Follow relaxation therapies to avoid mental stress and fatigue.


45. Home Remedies for Endometriosis
Every woman should have a proper knowledge on Endometriosis to avoid unnecessary complications. Menstruation every month is a healthy sign for an adult woman. Every month the tissues inside the uterus thickens, which lead to menstruation if fertilization of the egg with the sperm does not take place successfully. But, when there are certain variations from the original periodic cycle, and endometrium starts getting built up along the outer walls of the uterus, fallopian tube, ovaries, peritoneum and even the intestines, there arise complications. These tissues respond to these changes of the hormonal imbalance by releasing some amount of blood in between the second phase of the periodic cycle, which also leads to irritation of some of the tissues.

Major Symptoms of Endometriosis
Some of the major symptoms of endometriosis are given below:
Pelvic pain
Bloating
Menstrual pain
Pelvic discomfort
Painful sex
Effective Home Remedies to Treat Endometriosis
To treat this situation, several effective home remedies are there to treat endometriosis. Several modifications in lifestyle are recommended to treat this situation.

1. Reduce the Estrogen Level in the Body
Too much amount of fat disturbs the estrogen hormonal balance in the body. Thus, it is absolutely essential to maintain body weight and external compounds, which affect the estrogen level of the body.

2. Regular Exercise
Regular exercises coupled with yoga work wonderfully to alleviate stress from the individuals. These keep you physically fit and mentally healthy. Low impact exercises like swimming, walking and many more are effective during this situation. Performing Kegel exercises daily is highly recommended.

3. Meditation
This is yet an effective home remedy to get rid of Endometriosis. Meditation keeps away all the stress and tension away from you and keeps you calm and relaxed. This can wonderfully help to treat this situation greatly.

4. A Balanced Diet
It is essential to have an optimum amount of the vitamins, calcium, magnesium, fatty acids and selenium. Avoid caffeinated drinks and sources of hydrogenated fats. Also, eliminate consumption of dairy products and meat to a certain extent.

5. Alternating Hot and Cold Sitz Bath
This step is to be done for consecutive 4 to 5 times alternately with hot and cold water. The whole step shall be repeated for at least once daily to eliminate the problem.

6. Castor Oil
Castor Oil helps in effective blood circulation all throughout the body. It also helps to treat the situation of infertility to a huge extent. Apply castor oil on the lower portion of the abdomen and cover with a hot water bag. Carry out this step for at least 15 days consecutively to experience effective results.

7. Clay Mixture
Clay mixed with water and applied on the abdominal area and kept covered with a warm towel for a few minutes is also an effective home remedy to treat the situation. It is allowed to dry and then washed off. This process also needs to be repeated for fifteen consecutive days to get effective results.

8. Phytotherapy
This is yet another effective home remedy to treat endometriosis. This is a science based therapy, which uses the extracts of natural products and provides relief in a range of complex disorders.

9. Omega – 3 Fatty Acids
Supplements, which are rich in omega-3 fatty acids are highly anti-inflammatory in nature. These form to be the considerable remedies for treating endometriosis.

10. Pelvic Massage
To enable appropriate blood circulation in the abdominal and pelvic region, exerting acupressure by carrying out pelvic massage is highly effective. This helps to get rid of endometriosis effectively.

Tips
Eat balanced diet and avoid aggravated food items.
Recommended Exercise must be followed.
Practice yoga and meditation. 



46. HOME REMEDIES FOR ENLARGED PROSTATE

The prostate is a gland that produces the fluid which carries sperm during ejaculation.
Enlarged prostate is not usually a serious threat to a man’s health. In some men, the symptoms are mild and do not require treatment. In others, symptoms can be very troublesome and have a major impact on their quality of life. Prostate enlargement is a common condition associated with ageing. Around 60% of men who are aged 50 to 60 or over have some degree of prostate enlargement.

Complications of prostate enlargement can include urinary tract infections (UTIs) or acute urinary retention (AUR) but serious complications are very rare.

Symptoms may include:
The flow of urine is weaker and it takes longer to empty your bladder.
Urine flow becomes dribble towards the tip of passing urine
Frequent and urgent need to urinate.
Prolonged time taken to initiate urination etc.
USEFUL HOME REMEDIES
Pumpkin seeds are packed with a large number of health benefits including ones that help people with prostate enlargement. It is a rich in unsaturated fatty acids that is essential for the proper functioning of the prostate gland.
Mix a spoon of pumpkin seeds powder in a glass of diluted milk and drink daily.
A good way to regularly use this seed is to mix it with wheat flour and eat it in the form of chapattis
Take 1 tbsp of triphala powder, an ayurvedic herb; Add it to 250 ml of boiling water. Boil for 20 minutes, Strain the liquid and Drink when lukewarm.
Mix 1tsp amla powder, pinch oh turmeric powder and I tsp honey in a glass of water. Mix well and drink.
Vegetable juices are also great for people with prostate disorders. carrots and spinach are two that are known for their immense healing effect on the prostate gland
TIPS
Avoid prolonged sitting.
Obese people should try to cut down extra fat.
Avoid spicy, fried and junk food items.
Decrease the intake of alcohol, caffeine and other substances that irritates the urinary tract system.
Physical activities must be the part of daily routine.


47. HOME REMEDIES FOR FATTY LIVER

The condition of fatty liver takes place when the fats and triglycerides deposit in the liver. This is a reversible process and occurs due to heavy intake of alcohol. However, this condition is categorized into two groups – Alcoholic and nonalcoholic. Certain medicines, certain disorders like Wilson, diabetes also result in fatty liver condition. Fatigue, jaundice, edema, bruising and discomfort are the major symptoms of the fatty liver condition.

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES
1. GINGER
Ginger is considered to be the best herb for detoxification. This is because of the presence of the shogaols and gingerols in it. These enhance the process of treatment by removing the unwanted materials from the liver. This is highly beneficial.

Take 2 tsps of freshly grated ginger.
Add them in a cup of hot water.
Keep for 10 minutes.
Consume the tea twice on a daily basis.
2. GREEN TEA
Another wonderful home remedy is the green tea. Green tea has anti-oxidating properties and contains catechins. This helps in flushing out the toxins from the body easily.

Take 1 tsp of green tea.
Add in a cup of hot water.
Boil it for 5 minutes.
Consume it slowly.
Repeat the process daily to get benefitted.
3. LEMON
Lemon has a lot of anti-oxidants, vitamins and helps in preparing glutathione. This helps in treating t he fatty liver complication effectively.

Take a lemon and cut into halves.
Extract the juice of lemon in a glass of warm water.
Drink the solution in empty stomach on a daily basis.
4. GARLIC
One of the essential home remedies for fatty liver is garlic. Garlic has sulfur and anti-oxidating, detoxification properties. It has a lot of Vitamin C and helps in enhancing the immune system significantly.
Consumption of 2 – 3 raw and fresh cloves of garlic in empty stomach is recommended to treat the condition of fatty liver effectively.
These home remedies are extremely useful in the treatment of fatty liver condition !!


48. Home Remedies for Flat Belly

Weight gain has become a major issue these days. And our present lifestyle leads to more and more accumulation of fats in the abdominal region leading to belly fat. Accumulation of too much of body fat leads to several complications. Also, it results in lack of self confidence and people tend to lose their individualities. To get rid of such a condition, there are certain home remedies for flat belly.

Useful Home Remedies
1. Lemon Water
Lemon water is used to enhance the performance of the enzymes, which detoxify the liver and helps to metabolize the belly fat, which gets deposited along the waist line.
Have a glass of warm lemon water every day in the morning.
Make sure not to have anything else for the next 30 minutes.
2. Ginger Tea
Ginger is a thermogenic agent.
This helps to increase the temperature of the body, which leads to burning belly fat.
It also suppresses the production of cortisol, which is a steroid hormone.
The hormone helps in mobilization and regulation of energy.
Ginger acts as a natural digestive aid.
Consumption of ginger tea at least twice is effective.
3. Garlic
Garlic possesses anti-obesity characteristics.
It helps to enhance the cardiovascular system of the body, reduces both diastolic and systolic pressure and increases the content of good cholesterol.
Garlic provides hindrance to adipogenesis and is highly beneficial to lose belly fat.
4. Hot Peppers
Hot peppers have capsaicin.
It has thermogenic effects.
This enhances the production of heat of the body using more energy.
It enhances the fat oxidation and reduces the belly fat.
It is extremely advantageous for getting rid of belly fat.
Important Tips
Practicing balanced diet
Regular physical exercise
Drink a lot of water
Avoid consumption of alcohol
Do not skip the meals
Follow the above tips and remedies and lead a slim and healthy life !!



49. Home Remedies for Fracture

Fracture occurs, when a bone cracks or breaks. When fracture takes place, there exist tenderness, terrible pain, inflammation, numbness, blood accumulation underneath the skin, paralysis in the injured part and tingling.

There are two major types of fractures:-
Closed Fracture: When the skin covering the bone keeps intact
Open Fracture: When the bones break the skin below it
When a person undergoes fracture, it is highly important to consult a professional. But, there are certain home remedies and natural ways to do the preliminary treatment.

Effective Home Remedies
Right in the beginning apply the RICE treatment plan. RICE stands for the following:
1. REST
Stop moving the broken part immediately. The more you provide rest to your fractured part, the more easily it will get cured.

2. ICE
Immediately apply ice packs to the broken part. This reduces swelling of the affected area.

3. COMPRESS
Wrap the injured part in a bandage. But, do not do it tightly. This is because; wrapping tightly will stop blood circulation leading to more swelling.

4. ELEVATE
Keep the broken part in an elevated position. This is because; it prevents the blood from getting accumulated in the injured part leading to inflammation.

Apart from the RICE therapy, there are some other remedies as well. These are:
Consume half pineapple everyday till you are completely cured. The fruit contains the enzyme, Bromelain, which diminishes inflammation. But, it is recommended not to consume processed or canned pineapples.
Avoid red meat, caffeinated beverages and aerated drinks.
Do not eat foods, which have preservatives. They have phosphorus, which leads to the loss of the bones.
Consume boron. It is an important component for healing the fractured bones effectively.
Consume zinc. It repairs the damage caused by the tissues to a huge extent.
Consume magnesium, potassium and calcium. These minerals form essential ingredients to repair the damage caused by the bones and to maintain the condition of the heart and the muscles.
Besides following the therapy and home remedies, it is essential to take proper care of the fractured part of the body. Also, make sure to visit an orthopedic specialist to get the problem cured completely.


50. Home Remedies for Fibroids

Fibroids are also known as the uterine leiomyomas. They are non cancerous tumors and are muscular in nature. They are often formed in the form of clusters or groups. Pregnancy and fibroids are quite related.

Fibroids and pregnancy can have implications. The symptoms are very less. It increases the probability of bleeding, miscarriage and position of fetus. Other complications include bloating, infertility and constipation. Pain in the pelvic region, pain while having sexual intercourse and difficulty in urinating are the major symptoms of uterine fibroids. These fibroids are diagnosed by MRI and hysteroscopy. The hormones, progesterone and estrogen mainly induce the growth of the fibroids.

Effective Home Remedies for fibroids
1. CASTOR OIL PACK
Castor oil has anti-inflammatory properties. It provides relief from pain and help to shrink the fibroids. It increases the lymphocytes, which help to remove the toxic substances from the body. It provides a stimulating action on the circulatory and lymphatic systems of the body. Apply castor oil pack on the abdominal region.

2. MILK
This home remedy helps to eliminate the excess estrogen present in the body. Excess estrogen in the body leads to stimulating the cells and releases growth factors. This leads to the growth of the fibroids. It also helps in metabolism of the body. Thus, drinking milk on a regular basis helps to get rid of fibroids effectively.

3. GREEN TEA
Green has EGCG (Epigallocatechingallate). This prevents the growth of the fibroid cells. This compound has anti-proliferative, anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidating properties. It reduces the symptoms of the fibroids effectively and provides relief to a huge extent. Drink two cups of green tea daily.

4. GARLIC
Garlic has anti-oxidating and anti-inflammatory properties, which prevent the uterine fibroids and tumors effectively. Consume three cloves of garlic on a daily basis. It is a naturally occurring product, which treats the signs and symptoms of uterine fibroids.

Follow the above mentioned home remedies effectively. And get rid of the painful situation, prevent the incidence of the fibroids and various symptoms to a huge extent !!



51. Home Remedies for Food Poisoning

Introduction
Food poisoning is caused due to consumption of contaminated food and water. This problem can cause acute stomach pain, weakness, vomiting, diarrhea and body ache. It is mainly caused by consuming junk and fast food.

Home Remedies:-
1. Ginger
Ginger gives instant relief from the symptoms associated with food poisoning. It increases the production of hydrochloric acid in the stomach that increase the natural acidity levels of the stomach, to prevent harmful bacteria growth. Due to its anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties, relive food poisoning symptoms.

How to consume?
Mash half an inch of ginger using a stone mortar and pestle. To this fine ginger paste add half teaspoon of organic honey. Have this mixture once or twice a day.
Prepare a paste of ginger and add it to buttermilk. Consume this preparation.
Drink a mixture of ginger juice and lemon juice to avoid food poisoning symptoms.
Prepare an herbal tea by boiling one teaspoon of grated ginger in a cup of water. Have this tea by adding small amount of honey to it.
2. Banana
Banana is rich in potassium that reduce the negative effects of food poisoning. It restores potassium in the body which is depleted due to diarrhea and vomiting.

How to consume?
Eat a ripe banana daily.
Drink banana shake two to three times a day.
3. Fenugreek
Fenugreek seeds treat abdominal discomfort, abdominal cramps and vomiting caused in food poisoning condition. These seeds has the ability to treat indigestion.

How to consume?
Take one tablespoon of yogurt along with one teaspoon of fenugreek seeds. Swallow this mixture, no need to chew. This will provide immediate relief from vomiting and stomach pain.
Add powder of fenugreek seeds to milk or water. Drink this mixture to treat food poisoning naturally.
Prepare a mixture by adding one teaspoonful of cumin powder, fenugreek seeds powder in a glass of water. Drink this mixture.
4. Lemons
Lemon has anti-inflammatory, antibacterial and antiviral properties. The acid present in lemon kill bacteria that cause food poisoning.

How to consume?
Take one teaspoon of lemon juice add a pinch of sugar or salt to it. Drink this mixture two to three times a day.

5. Garlic
Garlic has strong antibacterial, antiviral and antifungal properties. It relieves the symptoms of abdominal pain and diarrhea caused in food poisoning condition.

How to consume?
Make a paste of garlic cloves, put it in a glass of warm water. Drink this mixture to reduce food poisoning symptoms.

6. Honey
Honey reduces inflammation in intestinal tract. The antibacterial property in it thwart the growth of bacteria. It act as a wonderful remedy for poisoning.

How to consume?
Mix one teaspoon of honey in a glass of lukewarm water. Drink this mixture two to three times a day.

7. Holy Basil
The anti-bacterial property of holy basil heal stomach infection caused during food poisoning. These leaves provide immediate relief from symptoms of food poisoning like vomiting and diarrhea.

How to consume?
Mix leaves of holy basil to three to four tablespoons of plain yoghurt. To this mixture add a pinch of black pepper and black salt. Have this preparation.

8. Apple Cider Vinegar
It contains minerals, vitamins and various amino acids that fight off food poisoning symptoms. Apple cider vinegar kill the bacteria that are responsible for food poisoning.

How to consume?
Consume two teaspoons of apple cider vinegar twice daily.
Mix two tablespoons of apple cider vinegar in a cup of hot water. Drink this mixture before eating meals.



52. HOME REMEDIES FOR FIBROMYALGIA

Fibromyalgia is an inflammatory problem, which is characterized by tenderness of the cartilages, stiffened joints and psychological and social pain. The major abnormalities related to fibromyalgia are thyroid related disorder, pain in the muscles and some others. The important causes are stress, fermentation of the food particles, imbalance of Vata and some others.

Muscle pain, hypersensitivity, depression, stiffened joints and ligaments, anxiety, menstrual pain are the common symptoms of fibromyalgia.

Self care is extremely important to treat fibromyalgia. It is essential that the patients take proper care of themselves to get rid of this inflammatory disorder.

USEFUL HOME REMEDIES
1. SUNSHINE
Patients suffering from Fibromyalgia tend to have low levels of Vitamin D. Vitamin D is also known as Sunshine Vitamin. Consumption of this vitamin helps in the proper functioning of nerves and muscles of the body. This acts as an important home remedy for fibromyalgia.

2. PEPPER
Pepper plant contains capsaicin. It is a natural reliever of pain. It helps to provide relief from the tremendous pain of fibromyalgia. It is a wonderful home remedy for fibromyalgia.

3. REGULAR EXERCISE
Initially, exercise increases pain. But, doing it regularly is very helpful in reducing the symptoms of fibromyalgia. Walking, biking, aerobics, swimming, maintaining good posture, relaxation exercises and simply stretching are highly effective.

4. ENOUGH SLEEP
Sleep is absolutely important to get rid of fatigue. Fatigue is an important reason of fibromyalgia. Also, practicing good sleeping habits, maintaining good posture, limiting sleeping during the daytime, maintaining a fixed sleeping schedule are very helpful.

5. AVOID STRESS
Emotional stress and over exertion are the two important causes of fibromyalgia. So, take some time out of your schedule from your daily routine and relax completely. You can also use certain techniques of stress management like meditation or deep breathing exercises.

6. HAVE A BALANCED DIET
To get rid of Fibromyalgia and its various symptoms, follow a balanced diet. Have healthy foods. Avoid the consumption of caffeine. Drink enough water. Try to remain healthy. Practicing a balanced diet is an essential home remedy for treating fibromyalgia.

Try and follow the above home remedies. Also, remember that over doing them on the good days and doing nothing on the bad days pose a serious impact. So, try to maintain a balance and uniformity all throughout. These together will help to eradicate fibromyalgia completely.



53. Home Remedies for Foot Blisters

The fluid filled small bumps, which are formed in the upper layers of the foot are known as the foot blisters. These are formed mainly due to excess rubbing in an area or friction to irregular surfaces. Some other causes are medical complications like herpes, chicken pox, diabetes, exposure to extreme climatic variations and allergic reactions. Based in these causes, foot blisters are of different shapes and sizes.

Symptoms of foot blisters
The major symptoms are pain, inflammation, tenderness and redness. The patient faces difficulty in walking. These blisters are extremely annoying and painful at times. They can be treated to certain extent using the home remedies. These home remedies are extremely useful and effective.

Effective Home remedies for Foot Blisters
1. Aloe Vera
Aloe vera has a lot of healing properties. It provides relief from blisters. It has anti-inflamamtory properties. It keeps the skin hydrated and reduces inflammation and swelling considerably. It also decreases the further chance of infection. Apply some amount of fresh aloe vera gel on the foot blisters. Keep for a few minutes. Wash with warm water.

2. Apple cider vinegar
Apple cider vinegar has anti-microbial properties. It is anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory in nature. It protects against skin infection and alleviates inflammation and pain. Apply a cotton ball dipped in apple cider vinegar on the affected part. It is highly effective.

3. Green Tea
Green tea possesses anti-oxidating and anti-inflammatory properties. It reduces the swelling and pain. It contains a lot of vitamins and helps to heal the blisters effectively. Consume green tea twice or thrice on a daily process to speed up the process of healing to a huge extent.

4. Tea tree oil
Tea tree oil has astringent and anti-bacterial characteristics. It helps to treat infection and reduce blister formation. Dip a cotton ball in diluted tea tree oil and apply on the affected area, Keep for around 10 minutes and wash with water. Do this twice daily. This is highly effective.

These are some of the effective home remedies for treating foot blisters. These help to get rid of the infection, swelling, pain and other symptoms to a huge extent.


54. Home Remedies for Gastritis

Degradation of the internal lining of the stomach gives rise to gastritis. It is characterized by inflammation, irritation, bleeding, dark stools, abdominal cramps, indigestion, bloating and even loss of appetite. Nausea, fullness feeling, burning sensation and vomiting are some of the important symptoms of this metabolic disorder. There are a lot of home remedies available to treat this problem.

Important Home Remedies for Gastritis
1. CORIANDER, CUMIN AND FENNEL
Take 1/4rth of each coriander, cumin and fennel. (Dhaniya, Jeera And Saunf)
Boil all these in in about 400 ml
Boil to prepare decoction
Boil till 50 to 60 ml remains.
Filter and drink twice daily.
2. GINGER
Ginger gas anti-microbial and anti-inflammatory characteristics. It helps in alleviating the symptoms of gastritis, treat pain, indigestion, vomiting and nausea effectively.

Chop fresh ginger root.
Add the chopped ginger to a cup of boiling water.
Keep it covered for 10 minutes.
Strain the solution.
Add honey to the solution
Consume the tea twice or thrice daily for a week to get wonderful results.
However, people having medical complications of high blood pressure or blood thinning must be careful while using this home remedy.

3. YOGURT AND ASFOETIDA (HING)
Addition of yogurt to the regular diet really helps to fight away gastritis. The probiotics present in yogurt protects the stomach from getting degraded and enhances the immunity of the individuals.

Consume approximately 3 cups of yogurt on a daily basis to get relief from the pain and other complications of gastritis. One can add pinch of hing also for better results.
One can also prepare a smoothie using yogurt, honey and banana. Consume it thrice daily and expect recovery at a quicker pace.
4. TULSI
Tulsi is an amazing home remedy for treating gastritis. The anti-microbial and anti-inflammatory characteristics of this herb provides tremendous releif from the irritation of gastritis.

Take some tulsi leaves.
Steep them in hot water for a few minutes.
Strain the solution.
Leave it to cool.
Mix some honey to the tulsi tea.
Drink the solution.
You can also simply chew 5 leaves of tulsi on a daily basis and get relief from the pain. Repeat this process for approximately a few weeks.

5. LICORICE
The soothing and anti-inflammatory properties of licorice make it highly beneficial for the treatment of gastritis. It helps to provide relief from the various symptoms of this painful metabolic disorder.

Take 1 tsp of licorice powder.
Add it to a cup of boiling water.
Steep the solution for approximately 10 minutes.
Strain the solution.
Consume the tea at least twice daily.
These home remedies are extremely effective in providing relief from gastritis !!



55. Home Remedies for Gout

Gout is a complex form of arthritis, which is characterized by pain, inflammation, tenderness and stiffened joints. It affects various body parts, which include joints on wrists, hands, knees and ankles. This situation is caused due to the accumulation of a large quantity of uric acid in the body. Other possible reasons of gout are too much intake of alcohol and proteins and lack of exercises and physical activities. Heredity and a high level of stress are the two other important factors, which lead to the occurrence of the disoarder, gout.

This disorder is also related to several complications like diabetes, hypertension, renal stones and other problems.

Effective home remedies for gout
The major home remedies, which provide relief from the pain, inflammatory disorder are the following:
1. Apple Cider Vinegar
Apple cider vinegar has several medicinal properties like anti-inflammatory, anti-stress, anti-microbial, anti-biotic and many more.
This provides relief from the acute pain and inflammatory condition.
Add some amount of honey to the apple cider vinegar and enhance the response of the body to this situation effectively.
Add one tsp of apple cider vinegar to a glass of water.
Drink the mixture thrice regularly.
2. Ginger
Ginger has anti-inflammatory, anti-stress, anti-bacterial, anti-viral and anti-microbial properties.
It is a superb Ayurvedic herb, which is used to treat the various complications easily.
This herb also helps in getting relief from the pain and inflammation to a huge extent.
You can consume ginger as raw pieces or can add in the daily diet.
But, consuming it regularly is essential. It is a superb home remedy for gout.
3. Lemon
 Another effective home remedy for gout is lemon.
It provides an alkaline medium to the body, which has a neutralizing effect to the excess quantity of uric acid in the blood.
Also, lemon contains Vitamin C, which strengthens the body tissues to a huge extent.
Simply add lemon juice to a glass of water and consume it thrice daily.
You can also add one fourth tsp black pepper powder for better results.
4. Baking Soda
Baking soda lowers the level of uric acid in the body, which is the major cause of gout.
It plays a huge role in providing relief from the pain and inflammation.
Take a half tsp of baking soda in water and drink the solution daily for at least 15 days.
However, do not use this remedy, if you are suffering from hypertension.
These home remedies are very beneficial for treating gout !!



56. HOME REMEDIES FOR GINGIVITIS
Gingivitis

Gingivitis is medically known as periodontal disease. This is a very common oral disease. It is also known as gum disorder. The major symptoms are swollen and tender gums coupled with pain and bleeding. It causes great discomfort. There are certain medical treatments. But, home remedies are very effective in treating the gingivitis away.

CAUSES OF GUM DISEASE
Gingivitis is mainly caused due to the deposition of bacteria on the teeth. This leads to the development of plaque, which further affects the gum to a huge extent. Also, the diet of soft and over processed food items, affect the enamel of the teeth. This also leads to gum diseases.

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES FOR GINGIVITIS
Home remedies are extremely important to treat gingivitis and provide relief from the pain and tenderness.

1. GREEN TEA
Green tea contains anti-oxidants and anti-microbial properties. Drinking green tea daily helps to have a control on the periodontal health. Drink 2 glasses of green tea daily. This is highly effective.

2. CLOVE
Clove is an important home remedy for gum diseases. It prevents the bleeding of the gums and also provides relief from the discomfort and pain. There may be a burning sensation initially. But, it won’t last for very long. It is a natural treatment to heal the bleeding gums.

3. LEMON JUICE
Lemon has vitamin C, which helps the gums to get rid of the infections. Also, it has anti-inflammatory properties. This is very effective for the treatment of the gum diseases. Apply some amount of lemon juice with some salt on the gums. Keep for a few minutes and then gargle with water. This helps to get relief from the pain and swelling.

4. MUSTARD OIL AND SALT
Apply some amount of mustard oil with salt on the gums. Repeat this process two times or three times daily. Massage the gums gently with the mixture. This helps to get rid of inflammation and pain and treat gingivitis effectively.

TIPS FOR TREATING GINGIVITIS
The effective tips for treating gingivitis are given below:
Brush the teeth daily
Clean the tongue regularly
Massage the gums on a daily basis.
Maintain a healthy dental hygiene.
Follow the tips and home remedies. Get rid of gingivitis effectively !!



57. Home Remedies to Grow Your Hair Faster
Grow Your Hair Faster,Healthy hairs

Hair is an important part of our body, which enhance our looks and appearances to a great extent. And every individual irrespective of gender, age and place keeps on thinking of the ways to grow her hair faster. But, due to the heavy pollution that exist in and around us today, hair fall has become a major concern these days. People are in constant search of remedies to grow their hair faster. Here, we shall discuss excellent home remedies to grow your hair faster.

Home Remedies to Grow Your Hair Faster
1. Onion Juice
Onion has sulphur, which boosts the production of the collagen tissues, which intern boosts the rate of growth of the hair. These tissues also help in the hair re-growth effectively.

2. Potato Juice
Potatoes contain Vitamin A, B, C. When the hair does not get sufficient amount of these vitamins from the body, it becomes fragile and dry. Applying potato juice during this situation can solve the problem greatly. Massaging the scalp for about 15 minutes or using a potato mask helps to grow the hair at a faster rate.

3. Egg White
Our hair needs a lot of nutrition and proteins to grow faster. The proteins obtained from the white part of the eggs act as wonderful home remedies for hair growth. A hair mask is formed using olive oil, egg white and honey. It is then applied on the hairs and kept for about fifteen minutes and then washed off with a mild shampoo. It also provides shine and imparts strength to the hairs to a huge extent.

4. Fenugreek
Fenugreek seeds also act as a wonderful home remedy. Soaked fenugreek seeds in water for about a day and rinsing the hair with the fenugreek soaked water prevents hair fall widely. After 3 hours of this activity, hair wash should be done with lukewarm water. Also, fenugreek hair mask can be prepared by mixing the fenugreek paste with coconut milk, which if applied on the hairs can work wonders.

5. Amla, Reetha, Shikakai
Amla contains Vitamin C and helps in collagen production. It removes the production of the free radicals enhancing hair growth. This herb along with shikakai and reetha is mixed with water and soaked overnight to form a shampoo. This liquid is then used to wash the hair.

6. Tomatoes, Aloe Vera and Olive Oil
A mixture is formed by blending tomato, olive oil with added aloe vera in it. This is then used as a hair mask and applied on the hair to make your hair grow at a faster pace.

7. Rosemary Water
This also acts as a wonderful way to fight off the scalp infections resulting in a healthy growth of the hair follicles, thereby enhancing the hair growth to a huge extent.

8. Aloe Vera With Honey Mixture
A mixture is prepared with the fresh leaves of the aloe vera and honey. This mixture is then applied on the hair and kept for a few minutes. After about 20 minutes, the hair is washed off normally with water. This increases the speed of hair growth largely.

9. Mixture of Almond Oil, Coconut Oil And Olive Oil
The natural oils, which include the almond oil, coconut oil and olive oil are taken together and mixed to form a mixture. This is then applied to the roots of the hair uniformly with the help of thorough massage. This besides providing nourishment to the hair; makes it strong.

10. Balanced Diet
This is a tremendous home remedy to increase the growth rate of the hair. A diet rich in vitamins, minerals and proteins shall be taken. This helps to remove dandruffs and oils from the hairs making it soft, yet healthy. Also, drinking a lot of water is highly recommended.

11. Massage the Scalp
Massaging with nutritional oils helps to increase the blood circulation in the scalp. The hair roots get sufficient nutrition and hydration. They are devoid of dryness and split ends and the hair becomes healthy enhancing the growth rate.

12. Washing Hair Regularly
Washing hair at least once in three days is extremely essential. This makes the hair free from dust, grease, oils and dandruff as well. This also makes the hair soft and healthy and helps to increase the rate of hair growth at a faster rate.



58. HOME REMEDIES FOR GOITER
Goiter

Goiter occurs due to the malfunctioning of the thyroid gland. Be it hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism, goiter shows the indication that there is certain abnormality with the functioning of goiter. Deficiency of iodine, Graves’ disease, thyroid cancer, pregnancy, nodules, Hashimoto’s disease and exposure to certain drugs give rise to the complication, known as goiter. Heredity plays a huge role in certain cases in Goiter. There is a noticeable inflammation in the neck region, difficulty in swallowing or breathing, harshness in the voice, problem in breathing and coughing.

HOME REMEDIES FOR GOITER
To treat the complication of Goiter, there are certain wonderful home remedies:

1. KANCHNAAR
This is a popular Ayurvedic herb, which has a huge detoxifying role in the lymphatic system of the body. This herb works wonders.

Take 10 to 15 grams of the bark of the Kanchnaar herb.
Boil it in 2/3rd cup of water.
Remove t he heat when the solution becomes 1/4th.
Strain it.
Consume it twice before meals on a daily basis.
2. DANDELION
Dandelion has anti-inflammatory characteristics. It helps to lower the swelling in the neck region. It helps to provide relief from the situation of goiter effectively.

Take 2 to 3 leaves of dandelion.
Make a paste of the leaves of the herb.
Add some butter to it and heat the paste.
Apply the mixture on the inflamed area. Keep for 10 minutes and remove it.
Repeat this process for approximately 15 days to get proper result.
3. GREEN TEA
Green tea has a lot of anti-oxidants and high quantity of fluoride. This helps in proper functioning of the thyroid gland.

Take 1 tsp of the leaves of the green tea.
Pour some hot water in a cup and add the leaves.
Steep it for approximately 5 minutes.
Strain it.
Add honey to the mixture and stir properly.
Consume the mixture thrice on a daily basis.
4. LEMON BALM
Another herb, which reduces the level of TSH and working of the pituitary gland is the lemon balm.

Take 2 tsps of lemon balm.
Pour some hot water in a cup and add the leaves.
Steep it for approximately 5 minutes.
Strain it.
Add honey to the mixture and stir properly.
Consume the mixture thrice on a daily basis.



59. Home Remedies for Gum Diseases
Gum Diseases

There are various types of gum diseases. These include periodontitis, gingivitis and some others. These disorders are extremely difficult and painful. It is extremely required to maintain a proper oral and dental hygiene to keep away from these gum related disorders. The gum diseases need to be treated with proper care and in due time. Else, it may lead to several serious dental complications. Red Gums, Sore gums and swollen gums are some of the gum related complications. There may be bleeding and excessive pain due to these gum diseases.

Home Remedies to Treat the Situation
1. SALT SOLUTION
Dissolve some quantity of sea salt in warm water. Sip the solution in the mouth for approximately 30 seconds. Then, spit out. Continue this for a few times. The salt solution cures the gum infection and reduces the swelling of the gums. This should be done two times daily.

2. TEA BAGS
Put a tea bag in the boiling water. Remove it and let it cool. Once cooled, place the tea bag on the infected part of the gum. Hold it there for approximately five minutes. You will definitely feel very comfortable. The tea bag has tannic acid. This relieves the infection and aids to get rid of the pain.

3. HONEY
Honey has wonderful anti-bacterial, anti-microbial, anti-septic and other therapeutic properties. After brushing the teeth, put some amount of honey on the affected area of the gums. It works wonderfully to get rid of the gum infection

4. CRANBERRY JUICE
Drinking the unsweetened form of the cranberry juice is a wonderful home remedy. Cranberry has the property of preventing the bacteria from getting stuck to the teeth and the gums. This treats the infection and helps to get rid of the microorganisms effectively.

5. LEMON JUICE
Make a paste using some salt and lemon juice. Apply the paste on the gum. Wait for few minutes. Then, gargle using warm water. Lemons contain Vitamin C, which fights away the microorganisms of the teeth. Also, they have anti-inflammatory properties. This provides relief from the pain and swelling of the infected gums.
Besides these home remedies, try to consume more and more foods rich in Vitamin C, avoid consumption of tobacco and stress to a huge extent. These altogether, will help to fight gum infection.



60. Home Remedies for Hair Fall
Hair Fall

Hair fall is a very common scenario. It is faced by people across the world irrespective of age and sex. It is a very embarrassing situation. It is also known as Alopec ia in terms of medical science. Many hair fall products are available in the market. But, still, the home remedies to solve such situation are extremely useful and effective.

Causes of Hair Fall
There are a lot of causes, which lead to the hair fall problem. These are:
Ageing
Lack of proper nutrition
Stress
Hormonal changes
Prolonged illness
Medicines
Heredity
Thyroid complications
Fungal infections
Pregnancy
Weight loss
Several medical complications
Home Remedies for Hair Fall
To treat the complication, follow the given home remedies. These are very effective and highly beneficial.

1. ALOE VERA
Aloe Vera has a lot of medicinal properties.
It fights away infection and maintains a balance in the pH level of the scalp.
It is highly effective for preventing hair loss.
Pure aloe gel is applied to the scalp and the head massage is done and left for a few hours.
It is then washed with lukewarm water.
The process should be done two times weekly.
2. AMLA
Amla is an effective home remedy to prevent hair fall.
It is known for its medicinal qualities.
Drinking amla juice regularly is a wonderful way to reduce hair fall and other hair related complications.
You can also mix the powdered amla with lime juice and apply on the scalp.
Leave for some period of time. Then, wash it off.
This reduces hair fall to a huge extent.
3. EGGS
Eggs are another rich source of protein and minerals such as selenium, iodine, phosphorus, iron and zinc.
Take the white part of one egg and mix in a teaspoon of olive oil. Beat to make a paste like consistency and apply to the entire scalp and hair. Keep it on for about 20 minutes and then clean with cool water and a mild shampoo.
4. HENNA
Henna Known for long as a natural hair color and conditioner.
Henna when combined with mustard oil, it works even better and has a major role in strengthening and conditioning hair.
Take one cup of the dry powder of henna leaves mixed with half a cup of curd.  Apply this to hair and allow drying, later wash with cool water and a mild shampoo.
Beside these home remedies, practice meditation and carry out yoga regularly. These are very important ways to maintain the hormonal balance in the individuals. All these prevent hair fall and the situation of Alopecia to a huge extent. Follow these home remedies to prevent hair fall.



61. Home Remedies for Healthy Vision
healthy vision

Maintaining a healthy vision has become a problem these days. This is particularly because of the increase in the number of hours that we spend in front of the computer screens. Thus, it has become absolutely important to improve the circulation of the eyes and to maintain them healthy.

There are a number of home remedies available to maintain a healthy vision.

Useful Home Remedies
1. Almonds, Figs, Raisins
These are extremely helpful to cope with the daily demands of the activities. Soak some of them in water overnight. Eat them in the morning in the empty stomach. These fruits have a lot of vitamins and fibers. This helps in maintaining good body metabolism and solving the vision related ailments.

2. Carrots
Carrots have abundant sources of Vitamin A. Consumption of this vitamin helps in enhancing the health of the eyes. It kills the ill impacts of stress, which affect the eyes and help to maintain a healthy vision.

3. Amla Juice
Having a cup of amla juice in the morning on an empty stomach is highly beneficial for maintaining healthy vision. This is because; amla has a lot of antioxidants. It contains retinols as well. These help to have a healthy vision.

4. Green Leafy Vegetables
To prevent macular degeneration and other vision related problems, green leafy vegetables have a lot of benefits. They prevent the gradual decline of vision. Spinach, kale, lettuce contain zeaxanthin and leutin. They are highly rich in anti-oxidating properties. These help to maintain a good vision eradicating the various eye related problems effectively.

5. Fatty Fishes
Fishes like salmons, tuna, mackerel and sardines are rich in Omega-3-fatty acids. These have a lot of health advantages; especially dry eye syndrome and macular degeneration. Thus, consuming the fatty fishes is extremely helpful in combating vision related problems.

6. Practice Some Eye Exercises
Stimulating the eye muscles is very important. These help in maintaining proper blood circulation. Also, massage the eyes gently to remove the fatigue and the tiredness of the over-stressed eyes. Also blink your eyes after every 5 to 6 seconds.

Tips
Give some rest to the eyes
Grab 8 hours of sleep
Avoid non-vegetarian diet and foods containing preservatives.
Practice yoga
These are some of the effective ways to get rid of the complications related to the over stressed eyes. These help to maintain a healthy vision and lead a healthy life.



62. Home Remedies for Heel Spur
Heel Spur

The deposition of calcium underneath the heel bone pulls away the plantar ascia from the heel. This situation is known as the Heel Spur. This situation is highly common in individuals with flat feet. Also, atheletes, who do a lot of jumping, jogging and running on hard surface tend to develop heel spur. Women wearing high heels are more vulnerable to heel spur to a huge extent. This condition does not show any prominent symptom as such. However, there arises too much pain in the heel at times. Inflammation and tenderness are the other characteristic feature of heel spurs.

Essential home remedies to treat heel spurs
Some of the important remedies, which help to treat heel spurs are the following:
1. Ice pack
Application of the icepack on the affected area helps to reduce inflammation, pain and tenderness.
It also provides a relaxing impact to the muscles and the affected heels to a huge extent.
However, do not apply ice directly on the skin.
his may lead to frost bite. Instead apply a freezing bottle on the feet.
2. Apple cider vinegar
It helps to pull the excess amount of calcium from the affected area.
It relieves swelling, inflammation to a huge extent.
Add 1 tbsp of unfiltered apple cider vinegar and honey to warm water.
Drink the solution two times daily.
3. Coconut Oil
Coconut oil acts as a natural moisturizing agent.
It softens the spur and relieves the pain.
Massage the area with warm coconut oil.
Leave for a few hours and get relief from the painful disorder of heel spur.
4. Turmeric
Turmeric contains curcumin.
This has anti-inflammatory and pain killing properties.
Thus, regular consumption of turmeric helps to relieve the pain to a huge extent.
Mix 1 tsp of turmeric in a cup of milk. Drink the mixture two times daily.
5. Salt water therapy
Add some amount of salt in a bowl containing warm water.
Mix it well
Keep your affected area in the same solution for some time.
Repeat this home remedy for 2 to 3 time a day.
It helps to reduce swelling and pain as well effectively.
These are some of the essential home remedies to treat the heel spurs effectively. Besides, there are certain tips, which should be followed. Do a bit of stretching exercise daily and take proper care of the affected area. All these will provide perfect relief from the painful condition.



63. Clear Vision Naturally: Effective Home Remedies to Improve Eyesight!
When we are born on this earth we are gifted with this beautiful, amazing, and priceless gift that is our eyesight. Beautiful eyes, a child opens his eyes and he sees the beautiful world he is brought into by his parents by God. Looking around the world we are able to see the beauty surrounding the birds, the wildlife and all the natural things. It’s only through eyes that we absorb and we happen to collect all the memories and we are able to recollect only because we have seen and imagined just those pictures are clicked inside. They are there forever and ever, this becomes a beautiful memory. Those beautiful cameras are our eyes, so how we can maintain that vision for a long time as long as we live on the earth we don’t want to just close our eyes, just close our eyes and imagine the world with closed eyes. It is so hard to imagine so the eyes are the beautiful gifts and we want that our eyesight is there for lifetime even if you are in your 80s. We want to enjoy this beautiful scenery, the waterfalls, the springs, all the beautiful sights, the mountains and the beaches, it can only be done through good vision, we are able to see around and we are able to make out the difference in things, the colors. So, how can we make good eyesight because today even the young children are facing problems with weaker eyesight, they have headaches and all of a sudden they complain to the teachers that they are not able to see clearly and blurred vision on the board is an alarming sign. The parents are also worried and complain that their child has poor vision. The child has to wear glasses all the time and it is very difficult for the little kids to keep the glasses safely. It is really sad to see little children handling those glasses all the time and it is painful on the sides of the ear. It is miserable to see that they are not able to enjoy without those glasses. So, how we can get rid of those glasses with natural things, we can always try some home remedies at home for good vision. So, let’s start with the remedies including

Eyesight
Home Remedy No.1 Amla (Emblica Officinalis)
Remedy number one for eyesight is Amla that is called gooseberry (Emblica officinalis) and one of the perfect fruits for eyes. It is good if you munch that directly, you can cut it into your salad. You can also mix it with the juices or try it with some apple juice or you can mix that even with the lemon. It is a very refreshing drink and it is a very delicious drink, even very effective for eyesight. If you are taking Amla regularly, you won’t have any eyesight problems for a long time even by the time you reach your 80s. You can try amla juice, you can just crush the fresh Amlas but at times amla can make your tummy loose. Make sure to eat two to three amla if you are comfortable or you can stick with only one amla with an empty stomach.

Home Remedy No.2 (Almonds, Black Pepper and Honey)
In home remedy two you have to take Almonds that are soaked overnight and peel them off. Then you have to take black pepper and honey, what we have to do is take four almonds and mix 2 to 3 black peppers along with that and take as much honey as you want. You have to take this mixture early in the morning like maybe with an empty stomach. It is one of the effective remedies and you have to try this for 21 days, that is for 3 weeks or maybe four months. You will see a good change in the eyesight when you get it checked with your eye specialist. You will be very happy with the results because this is a very ancient and very effective home remedy for eyesight.

Home Remedy No.3 (Carrots)
In remedy number three we have carrots, it is very effective for eyesight . What we can do is have as many carrots as you want to have in a day. It is very effective for a system particularly for vision because carrots have beta-carotene. It is very important for our eyes and this gives an amazing vision even when we are growing in age and we have all those problems with our sightedness. Everything like myopia and hypermetropia can be handled by taking carrots, maybe in any form. You can take as Gajar ka halwa which is commonly made in India and carrot is a delicacy dessert in India. You can also have this in the form of carrot juice and you can also add them in your salads. You can also make a vegetable out of it and consuming carrots in any form is very effective for eyes, So try this remedy in order to have better eyesight.

Home Remedy No.4 (Cow Ghee and Milk)
Remedy number four eyesight is what we can do in the evening or may be at bedtime. You can try this home remedy and in this simply you can take cow ghee. Cow ghee is very useful in most of the problems, so you will be surprised if you go through most of the home remedies it is present in most of them. As cow ghee and milk is very effective in problems like Insomnia, hypertension and many other kinds of diseases. So, it is a very effective home remedy again for eyesight. You can put half a spoon of cow ghee along with one glass of milk, this is even useful in old age people, even for young children, even for middle aged people. Both genders, whether its male or female, can try this remedy and it is very effective if you are working on computers for long hours. Cow’s milk is very relaxing for the body as it improves your vision, you can just try this remedy. You just have to put one small spoon of cow ghee in milk and drink this hot milk. You will definitely have a good sleep and will also enjoy good sleep.

Home Remedy No.5 (Rosewater)
For eyesight another remedy is rosewater which is very soothing, relaxing and cooling as well. Most of the female viewers will enjoy this remedy because of the beautiful fragrance of roses. What we can do is we can take cotton swabs and put rose water on the swabs, making it fully wet. Just before going to sleep or when you are relaxing in the evening or afternoon nap, if you are working in the office, you can use this. It is quite easy to carry as well and you can directly apply it on your eyes whenever you want. This is one of the effective remedies for making the vision better. This really gives a soothing and relaxing effect to the eyes and improves vision as well. So, rose water is very effective and you can use this remedy on a daily basis.

Home Remedy No.6 (Amla, Harar and Bahera)
Remedy number six for eyesight is a very effective remedy and it is one of the ancient remedies from the Ayurveda text books of Charak as well as Susruta. This is one of the beautiful remedies as you have to make decoction of three fruits. This includes Amla, Harar and Bahera, combination of all these three are called Triphala. As this has become synonymous with Ayurveda because when you talk about Ayurveda the first thing that ticks in your mind is nothing but triphala. These three fruits are one of the very effective remedies, if you take Amla, Harar and Bahera, that is terminala chebula, terminalia bellerica, and emblica officinalis. These three fruits are very effective, you just need to boil them in a big jar. When the quantity remains half, you can just filter the solution. You can keep it for three to four days, then make a new solution. What you have to do is simply rinse your eyes with the fruit water but remember not to directly rinse it. You have to do Gandusha which is you have to fill your mouth with normal water in the cheeks, and then rinse the mouth, remember to fill the mouth fully blown like a balloon. Don’t let the water out from the mouth until you have rinsed the eyes properly and if you do this regularly for about three to four times in the morning. If you do it regularly for three weeks you will see amazing results and all that blurriness will be gone. It is very effective in headaches, vision problems and you will have wonderful eyesight.

Home Remedy No.7 (Acupressure)
For eyesight remedy number seven is very useful and this one is related to acupressure points. What we can do is take cow ghee, take cow ghee and put this on the middle of two eyebrows. Then you need to put pressure in circular movement, to give pressure in between the two eyebrows. This is to be done for seven to eight minutes every night and this is a very effective remedy for eyesight. Acupressure points for this are dipping both thumbs in cow ghee and massage for five minutes on the right thumb. Every night if you do this for five minutes like on the right thumb and left thumb you will see amazing results for eyesight.

So, from Planet Ayurveda we have lovely products for eyesight and that is we have Bilberry capsules, Triphala Ghrit, Amalaki Rasayan just like discussed above, Amla is great. It is very effective for eyesight and can be used for all kinds of eyesight related problems.

Conclusion
Eyes are the gift from God and having a good vision is really important because as you grow up the vision gets affected. So, in order to make your vision better and also if you want that your vision is not affected. Then you definitely need to try these home remedies which will naturally increase your eyesight without causing any side-effects.




64. Hearing Loss In Children And Its Treatment In Ayurveda
Abstract
Words of wisdom or love, the enduring murmur of trees and winds, the warning boom of a car’s horn; all these are informed by our hearing sense which connects us to the world in progress. Such activities such as the objects rubbing against each other, striking here and there, air troubled by vocal cords; all these are only possible to experience by a hearing sense. So if someone’s hearing sense is not working properly he or she will be away from experiencing all such types of things. So whenever you come to know your child has hearing loss you must check with a doctor on an early basis. In today’s article we are going to discuss all about hearing loss in children and how it affects the child’s development along with its Ayurvedic management.

Hearing Loss In Children, Causes of Hearing Loss
Introduction
Hearing loss occurs at any age but if it develops in infants and toddlers then it is of more concern as it leads to developmental changes. If this condition is not recognised in early stages then it affects in understanding language and to speak. If your child is recognised with hearing loss then immediate attention is needed to avoid such developmental things like speech. The hearing loss may be congenital or acquired, acquired one includes various causes that we will discuss in the further article.

Some Facts About Hearing Loss
Following are some facts about hearing loss:

One out of two cases of hearing loss in children is genetic
One out of four children has hearing loss due to maternal infections
Noise is one of the leading causes
It may related to other diseases
Some medications may also cause hearing loss
Causes Of Hearing Loss In Children
Bulk of children experience modest hearing loss when the fluid accumulated in the middle ear by cold, congestion or any ear infection. This type of hearing loss is temporary and the normal hearing sense returns after the congestion and other causes get relieved.
In 1 out of 10 children, this fluid stays in the middle ear after an ear infection when there is a problem in the eustachian tube, the children experience delayed hearing due to this.
Less common is permanent hearing loss in which impairment is permanent and it leads to developmental and speech difficulties. It varies from partial to complete.
Types Of Hearing Loss
Following are the types of hearing loss:

Conductive hearing loss: When the child is suffering from conductive hearing loss this occurs due to abnormal structure of the middle ear or outer ear canal. The other reason is a large amount of wax clogging in the ear canal. And one other reason is fluid accumulation in the middle ear which disrupts the transfer of sound.
Sensorineural hearing loss: This type of hearing loss is also known as nerve deafness as it is caused by abnormality in the nerve of the inner ear which carries sound messages to the brain from the inner ear. This kind of impairment is congenital or may occur at any time.
Mixed hearing loss: This type of hearing loss includes both Conductive and sensorineural type of hearing loss.
Signs Of Hearing Loss In Children To Be Watched
Following are the signs which the parents must notice in their children:

A child is not alarmed at loud noise since 1 month
Infant not turn around by listening sound at the age of 3 or 4 months
Child is unable to notice you while not see you
Speech is delayed
Hard to understand speech
When a child is unable to speak a single word such as mama, dada, baba, etc by the age of 12-15 months.
Unable to speak 5 to 10 words by the age of 18 months
Able to hear high pitch sound but not the low pitch sounds
All the developmental factors such as walking, talking, sitting properly are impaired.
So if you are noticing these things in your child then it is a must to visit a paediatrician as early as possible to manage it timely.

Diagnosis Of Hearing Loss
When you take your child to the paediatrician he may ask you the past history or medical history. He asks questions from the above mentioned signs and if he depicts that it is hearing loss then refers your child for a few examinations. It is done by electrodiagnostic testing in neonates and clinical examination along with tympanometry in children is quite helpful to diagnose hearing loss.

Ayurvedic View Of Hearing Loss
Ayurveda is a 3000 years older holistic science which is working since then for promotive and preventive purposes. As per this ancient science hearing loss is correlated to Badhirya. In this case vitiated vata and vitiated kapha dosha cause obstruction in shabd vaha srotas or shabd vaha sira (auditory canal or auditory vessels); lead to hearing loss which is termed as bhadhirya. The vataj bhadirya is correlated to sensorineural deafness, kaphaj bhadhirya is correlated to conductive deafness and vata kaphaj one is correlated to mixed one. So to alleviate hearing loss, as per Ayurveda the management will be by pacifying avta and kapha dosha.

Herbal Remedies By Planet Ayurveda For Hearing Loss In Children
Planet Ayurveda is an Ayurvedic product company whose products are certified with ISO and GMP certification. The formulations are prepared under the guidance of M.D. Ayurveda practitioners and free from added preservatives and synthetic materials. The supplements are made with reference to the aim of Ayurveda that is to prevent the health of the healthy and to promote the health of the diseased person. For the management of Hearing loss in children Planet Ayurveda provides the following herbal and herbomineral remedies. Let’s have a look!!!!

Products List
ASHWAGANDHAGHAN VATI
BRAHMI CHYAWANPRASH
BRAHMI VATI
KUMAR KALYAN RAS
ARVINDASAV
Hearing Loss In Children, Causes of Hearing Loss
Buy Now
Products Description
1. ASHWAGANDHAGHAN VATI
Ashwagandhaghan vati is a classical Ayurvedic formulation which has been used since ancient times for vata pacifying effect. This formulation is made up with the major ingredient Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera). These tablets assist in the vataj kind of bhadhirya which means it assists the management of sensorineural deafness. Ashwagandhaghan vati works in this type of deafness by promoting the functioning of the nerve of the inner ear.

Dosage: 1 tablet twice daily with plain water after meals.

2. BRAHMI CHYAWANPRASH
Brahmi Chyawanprash is a classical ayurvedic formulation prepared by Planet Ayurveda as mentioned in classical texts. This remedy is available in lehya (jam) form and consists of ingredients such as Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri), Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera), shatavari (Asparagus racemosus), vasaka (Justicia adhatoda) and various others. This remedy is very effective in promoting hearing sense by pacifying vata dosha. Brahmi Chyawanprash assists in promoting the development of the child too.

Dosage: ½ tsp twice daily with plain water after meals.

3. BRAHMI VATI
Brahmi vati is a tablet formulation prepared by Planet Ayurveda as mentioned in classical Ayurvedic texts. These tablets consist of ingredients such as brahmi (Bacopa monnieri), shankhpushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis), maricha (Piper nigrum) and various others. This formulation is very best for maintaining nervous system health. By maintaining nervous system health it improves the functioning of the inner ear nerve and alleviates the healing loss.

Dosage: 1 tablet twice daily with plain water after meals.

4. KUMAR KALYAN RAS
Kumar Kalyan Ras is one of the best Ayurvedic remedies for children. This remedy is prepared by Planet Ayurveda as per the advice of M.D Ayurveda practitioners. The remedy is in tablet form and consists of ingredients such as kumari (Aloe barbadensis), mukta bhasma (Calyx of pearl), loha bhasma (calyx of iron), makshik bhasma (Calyx of copper and iron pyrite) and various others. This medicine has been used since ancient times for pediatric patients whose milestones are delayed. So we can give this remedy in hearing loss for enhancing the developmental aids.

Dosage: 1 tablet twice daily with plain water after meals.

5. ARVINDASAV
Arvindasav is one of the best remedies in Ayurvedic classics for maintaining child health. This remedy is available in syrup form and consists of ingredients such as kamal phool (Nelumbium speciosum), manjishtha (Rubia cordifolia), choti elaichi (Elettaria cardamomum) and various others. This remedy is considered as best for fighting infections and boosting immunity in the childhood age. So adding this remedy in the management will help in boosting the management.

Dosage: 2 tsp twice daily with plain water after meals.

Conclusion
Hearing loss occurs at any age but if it develops in infants and toddlers then it is of more concern as it leads to developmental changes. The causes of hearing loss includes fluid accumulation in the middle ear, fluid resistance in the middle ear, deformity in the structure of middle ear, obstruction in the outer canal by wax and congenital causes. Symptoms include delayed speech, difficulty while understanding speech and other developmental problems. As per Ayurveda this condition is correlated to bhadhirya and mainly involves vata and kapha dosha vitiation. To manage this condition Planet Ayurveda provides with various remedies to alleviate vata and kapha dosha and to promote the development of children.



65. Natural Home Remedies to Soothe Chilblains: Effective Solutions for Relief
Have you ever noticed swollen or red toes in the winter season? Does this problem go away in the summer season? Then you are definitely suffering from Chilblains and usually doctors don’t take them seriously. They recommend waiting for the weather to change so what happens in the season. So, what happens? Chilblains are basically a problem where there is poor circulation of blood particularly to our hands or to our feet, nose, and ear. They become red, swollen and itchy, at times it becomes very blue and patients suffer from this problem. The patient just tries to avoid cold weather because the problem aggravates. What happens is that the vessels inside become leaky and this fluid is out, this gives inflammation. There is a lot of itching and scratching at times but you can easily handle this through simple as well as effective home remedies.

Chilblains is experienced in the cold weather

Chilblains, Chilblains Relief, Chilblains Treatment
Home Remedy No. 1 (Alkanet, Aloe Vera gel, Vermillion and Egg yolk)
What we can do is we can try some very beautiful and safe home remedies just sitting at our home. Let’s start with remedy number one so take these four things including Alkanet which is called Ratanjot in hindi, Aloe vera paste, Sindoor called Vermillion and many ladies are familiar with it and one spoon egg yolk. Take each of the ingredients together and make a paste out of it. Apply the paste on the affected part and this is a very effective home remedy for chilblains. Do this remedy for four to three days and you don’t even need to put any other ointment. Just put this paste on the chilblains wherever it is swollen or itchy. You will see a good change in your problem and you will definitely appreciate this home remedy.

Home Remedy No. 2 (Turnip spa)
Remedy two for chilblains and this is a kind of a spa for the foot made from turnip which is called shalgam in hindi. So, you can just give a spa as you just have to boil the turnips and then you can put it in a big tub. Just sit around and put your feet, what you can do is boil the turnips in the required quantity of water, maybe take three to four turnips. Then pour some mustard oil and if not available you can use sesame oil, coconut oil or even olive oil but the best thing is mustard oil. Pour some mustard oil and this is a very beautiful remedy, you will see soothing as well as calming effects. You can keep your foot in it for 15 to 20 minutes, the swelling even if your hands are swollen. You can have this spa as it is a very effective remedy for chilblains.

Home Remedy No. 3 (Turmeric and Cow Ghee)
Remedy number three for chilblains you need cotton, most commonly used remedy is turmeric, cow ghee. So, these are the three things and this is a very effective remedy. Take the cotton swab and dip it in water to make it wet. Put this wet cotton on a burner but don’t burn it and then put a pinch of turmeric on it along with that and put a little of cow ghee. After putting it on a little frame, make it a little warm and then put this wet swab on the chilblains, maybe on your fingers or maybe on your feet wherever there is a lot of inflammation. You can put this a little warm by heating it on a low flame and just tie this on the affected area and believe me it’s one of the affected remedies for chilblains. You will enjoy this remedy and also feel good with it.

Home Remedy No. 4 (Apple Cider Vinegar Spa)
Remedy number four for chilblains is again a spa kind of a treatment. This is a foot spa with the vinegar that is apple cider vinegar like you can put two to three spoons of vinegar in the tub. You can take a little lukewarm water and enjoy this spa for 10 to 15 minutes. This gives real good relaxation to the feet and it improves the circulation. As the warmth of vinegar improves the blood circulation and all the inflammation subsides.

Other than this, we have seen that most of the people are tracking people and all the trampers when they are going up and they are on high mountains suffer from chilblains. They have nothing, they use their own urine therapy, they urinate on their own feet where they have swelling even the urine helps to subside the inflammation. Other remedies that rural people use are putting their feet in cow dung, the fresh cow fat they put their feet in and they see amazing results because that subsides the inflammation and gives a soothing effect to chilblains.

Other than home remedies you can use these beautiful products from Planet Ayurveda. This includes Nirgundi oil which is very effective for chilblains if you put the oil daily like the bedtime or may be daytime, massage it as it improves circulation. Then comes Curcumin capsules, Gotu Kola and Garlic capsules, these three medicines are wonderful for chilblains . So, do try this and you will be comfortable and will enjoy good health.

Conclusion
In cases of chilblains it’s better to prevent yourself as “prevention is better than cure”. Therefore, it is better to try theres natural home remedies given above in order to avoid this in the winter season. These remedies will help in treating the chilblains without causing any side effects.



66. HOME REMEDIES FOR HYPERTENSION
Hypertension

Hypertension is a serious issue and it should be treated seriously and in due amount of time. There are several serious complications related to hypertension. And these are cardiac arrests, strokes, kidney failure. If the issue becomes serious, it may also lead to the death of the individuals. So, hypertension needs to be diagnosed in proper time to avoid its severe impacts and consequences.

MAJOR CAUSES OF HYPERTENSION
Obesity
Excessive consumption of alcohol
Lack of proper exercise and physical activities
High consumption of salt
Stress
EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES FOR HYPERTENSION
1. GARLIC
Garlic helps in lowering the blood pressure of the individuals significantly. Also, it helps to reduce the level of cholesterol in the blood and relax the blood vessels by instigating the nitric oxide and hydrogen sulphide production. Thus, consumption of garlic is highly effective.

2. LEMONS
Lemons remove the rigidity of the blood vessels making them soft. The chances of heart attack are lowered eventually by consuming lemon juice regularly. This is because; lemons contain vitamin C and it has anti-oxidating characteristics, which help to balance the harmful impact of the free radicals to a huge extent.

3. BANANA
Bananas are abundant sources of potassium, which decreases the impact of sodium significantly. Along with banana, one can also consume dried apricots, currants, raisins, zucchini, spinach, orange juice, winter squash and cantaloupe. People having these fruits regularly eventually have a control on hypertension.

4. COCONUT WATER
Coconut water contains magnesium, potassium and Vitamin C, which help to lower the systolic blood pressure. Also, individuals with hypertension must always keep their bodies hydrated. Thus, coconut water serves to be a wonderful home remedy for hypertension.

5. WATERMELON SEEDS
Watermelon has vasodilator property. The seeds, it possesses cucurbocitrin. This helps to make the blood capillaries wide. It also improves the functioning of the kidneys and helps to prevent the occurrence of arthritis. This, in turn, reduces the level of blood pressure and hypertension to a certain extent.

It is recommended to consume a tsp of the grinded mixture of equal quantity of poppy seeds and watermelon seeds in the morning. This helps to be healthy and keep hypertension at bay.

TIPS
Grab a good amount of sleep,
Maintain a balanced diet,
Consume a good quantity of water
Take adequate rest.




67. Home Remedies for Headache
Headache

Introduction
Headache is consider as pain that disables anyone to think normal and positive thinking. It is classified in several ways like tension, cluster and migraine. Headaches are most common due to tension, cluster are those type of headache that repeat every two weeks with periods of remission. Migraine causes additional problems like stress and nervousness. Some home remedies can resolve headache condition naturally.

Home Remedies:-
1. Cloves
The cooling and pain-relieving properties of clove help to ease headache naturally. It can be used to alleviate headaches. Cloves provides a nerve-soothing effect which reduces the pain and help in relaxing the nerves of the head.

Procedure to use cloves:-
Make a paste of four to five cloves and place it on forehead for half an hour. This paste will provide cooling effect to the nerves that reduces headache.
Take few cloves crush them. Put them in a clean handkerchief or in a sachet. Inhale the smell of these cloves whenever you have headache attack. Use this until you get some relief from headache.
Take a tablespoon of carrier oil like (avocado oil, almond oil or sesame oil), put two drops of clove oil and massage your forehead. With this mixture massage for twenty minutes or more. Definitely you will get relief from headache.
Prepare a mixture by adding two teaspoons of coconut oil, two drops of clove oil and one teaspoon of sea salt. Mix it well and apply this mixture on forehead for twenty minutes.
2. Cinnamon
Cinnamon is consider as a miracle spice that treat headache and its symptoms effectively. It is well known herb for its medicinal qualities.

Procedure to use cinnamon:-
Take few cinnamon sticks and make a paste of it by mixing little water. Apply this paste over the forehead for thirty minutes. Wash it off with lukewarm water to get relief from headache.
In a glass of milk, add two teaspoons of powdered cinnamon. Heat this mixture until close to boiling point, but donot allow it to boil. Now take this mixture and add a teaspoon of honey to it. Drink this mixture to get rid of headache.
3. Apple
Apple help to restore acid-alkaline balance in the body. It can be used to fight off a headache naturally.

Procedure to use apple:-
Eat an apple early morning by sprinkling some salt on it.
Add two teaspoons of apple cider vinegar to a glass of water. Put small amount of honey and a splash of lemon juice to it. Drink this mixture.
Prepare a mixture by adding half cup of apple cider vinegar with half cup of water. Boil this mixture in a covered pan. Remove the pan, hold a towel over your head and slowly inhale the steam.
4. Holy Basil
This herb has analgesic effects that reduces pain during headache. The oil of this herb helps to get rid of headaches and works as a muscle relaxant.

Procedure to use Holy Basil:-
Chew some fresh holy basil regularly.
Prepare an herbal tea by adding three to four fresh basil leaves in two cups of water. Boil it until remains one cup. Have this preparation.
Inhale the steam prepared by boiling some holy basil in a saucepan.
Massage your forehead with small amount of basil oil. Apply this for twenty minutes.
5. Ice Bag
It is a simple and effective home remedy for headache as it reduces the acute pain.

Procedure to use Ice bag:-
Take 4-5 ice cubes and wrap it into a towel. Apply this on forehead for 5-10mins. Repeat this process for several times to get quick relief.

6. Ginger
This herb is consider as an excellent pain killer. Ginger helps to reduce inflammation of the blood vessels in the head.

Procedure to use ginger:-
Prepare an ointment by rubbing dry ginger with a water on a grinding stone. Apply this over the forehead for fifteen minutes.
Make an herbal tea by adding ginger root, equal parts of ginger juice and lemon juice. Steep it for five minutes. Consume this tea once.
7. Green Tea
Green tea act as an effective pain killer. It is packed with powerful nutrients and antioxidants. This is a perfect remedy for headache. With a cup of green tea the constricted blood vessels begin to dilate.

Procedure to use green tea:-
Drink a cup of green tea daily.

8. Sandalwood
This herb relieve stress and anxiety during headache. Sandalwood is ancient herb used for its medicinal properties.

Procedure to use sandalwood:-
Make a paste prepared from crushed holy basil leaves and sandalwood. Apply this preparation on forehead to reduce headache.
Apply dilute sandalwood oil on forehead as it cure headaches caused by heat.
9. Peppermint
The calming and numbing properties of peppermint help to reduce headache. It contains menthol that regulate blood flow in the body.

Procedure to use peppermint:-
Make an herbal tea by adding one teaspoon of dried peppermint to two cups of water. Boil the water until it remains one cup. Drink this tea by adding some honey to it.
Prepare a mixture of one tablespoon of almond oil, three drops of peppermint oil or just add a little water to this mixture. Massage your forehead and head to get relive from headache.
10. Lavender Oil
Lavender oil reduces pain and stress in headache and migraines. The essential oil present in it reduces pain.

Procedure to use lavender oil:-
Apply lavender oil on forehead or head to reduce pain.
Add two drops of lavender oil to two cups of boiling water and inhale the steam.
Mix two to three drops of almond oil and olive oil. Massage your forehead with this mixture to get relief from headache and its related symptoms.



68. Top 7 Superfoods for Healthy Heart
To keep yourself healthy is essential to protect your heart. You need to be regular with exercise and eat healthy for healthy heart. Most of the heart diseases occur due to the wrong eating habits. By eating right kind of food you can prevent the various heart diseases.

Here we will discuss top 7 super foods that help to keep your heart healthy.

Top 7 Superfoods for Your Heart
1. Oranges
Oranges contain beta-cryptoxanthin, beta- and alpha-carotene, lutein (carotenoids) and flavones (flavonoids), potassium, folate which are good for heart. It also contains vitamin C that prevents the heart stroke and boost up immune system.

How to use?
One can eat raw oranges as fruit.
Another way to take orange is to drink orange juice. For taste you can add cinnamon, lime juice and salt as per your taste.
Top 7 Superfoods for Healthy Heart
2. Walnuts
These are good source of omega fatty acids, vitamin E, magnesium, folate, heart favorable mono and polyunsaturated fatty acids. These help to improve cholesterol level and prevent from many heart disease.

How to use?
Eat 1-2 pieces of walnuts as snacks.
You can add Walnuts as flavor crunch to salads, pastas, cookies, muffins, even pancakes.
3. Blueberries
All berries are rich in antioxidant but blueberries have the most. Blueberries contain beta-carotene and lutein (carotenoids), anthocyanin (a flavonoid), ellagic acid (a polyphenol), vitamin C, calcium, magnesium, potassium and fiber. Blueberries decrease the risk of cardiovascular diseases.

How to use?
Consume ½ to 1 cup of raw blueberries.
One can take blueberries juice. Take ½ cup of blueberries, ½ bowl pomegranate seeds and half cucumber, add ½ cup water and blend all together to make a smooth puree. Then strain it using fine mesh strainer. Drink the collected juice.
4. Avocado
These fruits are rich source of antioxidants and reduce the risk of heart disease. They are rich in healthy monounsaturated fats which are good for heart.

How to use?
Consume 1-2 avocado daily.
It can also be taken in the form of fruit chat. Take 1 -2 avocado and 1 apple. Cut them into pieces. Add few drops of lemon and for taste you can also add salt into it.
5. Chia Seeds
These are powerhouse of nutrition. Chia seeds help to reduce the bad cholesterol and good for healthy heart. Also help to lower the blood pressure.

How to use?
Consume 1 teaspoonful of chia seeds.
You can soak 1/4 cup (40 grams) of chia seeds in 4 cups (1 liter) of water for 20–30 minutes and drink this water. You can add few drops of lemon or fruits like orange for flavor.
It can be taken with soups or smoothies.
6. Pomegranate
Pomegranate phytochemicals reduce LDL oxidation and effectively helps to maintain normal blood pressure.

How to use?
Consume pomegranate juice daily, 50 ml once is enough to meet the requirements.
You can also have it as it is with other allowed fruits like avocado, apple and papaya, berries and oranges.
Dry pomegranate seeds (anardana) chutney is another wonderful home remedy for healthy heart. It can be prepared by soaking it for some time. Mint leaves, coriander leaves with little salt and required other condiments can be added. Have this with fruits or bread and curry.
7. Oatmeal
Oatmeal is high in soluble fiber that helps to lower the cholesterol. It contains omega-3 fatty acids, magnesium, potassium, niacin, calcium and soluble fiber and good for heart. Its regular consumption helps to lower the level of LDL or bad cholesterol.

How to use?
You can eat plain oatmeal in the breakfast or can eat as snacks throughout the day.
You can add nuts or vegetables according to your taste.




69. Natural Solutions for Respiratory Allergies: Effective Home Remedies to Breathe Easy

Respiratory Allergies
Here Are The Lists Of Home Remedies
Home Remedy No.1 (Milk and Dates)
So let’s start with remedy number one for respiratory allergies like when we face flu-like symptoms. We have a runny nose and we are sneezing with some itchy eyes. So, what we can do, the first thing we can take from the kitchen is to take dates. They are quite often present in our kitchen and you can boil two dates in the milk. Take fresh milk and boil these dates in one glass of milk or you can also add water to it. You can drink this milk and you don’t even need to add sugar as it contains natural sugar. You can drink this milk in the morning and evening, this is very effective with the people who have runny noses or sneezing. You don’t need to start any kind of Allopathic medicine or antibiotics as this is one of the good herbal remedies which we can easily find at our place.

Home Remedy No.2 (Milk, Turmeric and Almond oil)
Remedy number two what we can do in this is we can take plain milk again it should be hot. We take a little bit of one spoon of almond oil, half a spoon of turmeric or either you can boil these things directly into milk. Take half a spoon of turmeric and one spoon of almond oil, and boil this. If you find it bitter or find it difficult for the little kids, you can take hot or cold milk, add little turmeric along with that and add one fourth spoon of almond oil. Mix this together and you can also add sugar to it or according to your taste. You can drink this every morning and evening as this is a useful remedy for sneezing problems like when you get up in the morning. If you have a runny nose then you can try this.

Home Remedy No.3 (Black gram powder, Cow ghee and Milk)
Remey number three, It is a very effective remedy even for young kids and once they start drinking it and they enjoy it, they keep on asking their grandmothers or mothers to make this thing again. This is a very refreshing thing for children, so what we have to do is take one black gram powder called basin, cow ghee and fourth thing is milk. What we do is we take one spoon of besan that is black gram flour, then add two spoons of cow ghee and we roast that on a high flame, then add sugar equivalent to the besan quantity like one spoon of besan and one spoon of sugar, maybe you can add more sugar. Roast them on the flame and then what you do is once it is red, put milk according to your quantity if you want one cup or you want to drink a big glass of this mixture and boil them at a good temperature. You have to drink it hot and enjoy this sweet drink.This is really good for your chest for all the phlegm deposited inside the chest, all the congestion, all the runny nose that you face and even sneezing if you are drinking this morning or evening for three to four days you will definitely see positive change.

Home Remedy No.4 (Basil, Ginger, Black Pepper and Honey)
Remedy number five includes seven things including English tea also called Assam tea. Then take a dalchini called cinnamon, then take big and small cardamom, take black pepper seeds,clove buds and mustard oil. So, these are the seven things needed in this remedy for respiratory things like sneezing, runny nose, itching in the nose and all these kinds of flu-like symptoms. So, what you have to do is take one big piece of dalchini, two pieces of big and small cardamom which is enough, four black pepper, two to three cloves, one spoon of mustard oil and half teaspoon of Assam tea. Then boil them in one glass of water and make them in a way you make normal tea. This is more like a herbal masala tea and it is very effective tea, you don’t need to put milk in this. Just boil them and with mustard it is very effective because it is responsible for flushing out phlegm that is deposited in the chest. Drink this every morning as well as evening, you will see amazing results with this.

Home Remedy No.5 (English tea, Cinnamon, Cloves, Black pepper, Big Cardamom, Small Cardamom and Mustard oil)
Remedy number five includes seven things including English tea also called Assam tea. Then take a dalchini called cinnamon, then take big and small cardamom, take black pepper seeds,clove buds and mustard oil. So, these are the seven things needed in this remedy for respiratory things like sneezing, runny nose, itching in the nose and all these kinds of flu-like symptoms. So, what you have to do is take one big piece of dalchini, two pieces of big and small cardamom which is enough, four black pepper, two to three cloves, one spoon of mustard oil and half teaspoon of Assam tea. Then boil them in one glass of water and make them in a way you make normal tea. This is more like a herbal masala tea and it is very effective tea, you don’t need to put milk in this. Just boil them and with mustard it is very effective because it is responsible for flushing out phlegm that is deposited in the chest. Drink this every morning as well as evening, you will see amazing results with this.

Conclusion
Allergy is commonly seen when you have low immunity and your body reacts to different things. This then causes many health problems and sometimes even results in breathing difficulty. The above mentioned easy home remedies help in naturally treating the respiratory allergy and it’s one of the easy as well as safe ways.



70. Home Remedies for Hyperthyroidism

Hyperthyroidism is a physiological disorder, where the thyroid gland produces excess amount of thyroid hormone in the body of the individuals in a very short duration of time. Fatigue, irregular sleeping patterns, restlessness, diarrhea, goiter, irregular menstruation, weight loss, itching, vomiting and nausea are the major symptoms of Hyperthyroidism. Graves’ disease, unusual secretion of TSH (thyroid stimulating hormones), too much consumption of iodine, non-cancerous growth of nodules and swelling of the thyroid gland are the major causes of Hyperthyroidism. Hypothyroidism is a medical condition, which occurs due to the underactivity of the thyroid gland. Thyroid gland is an essential part of the human body, which affects the overall metabolic processes of the individual to a huge extent. The common symptoms of hypothyroidism are fatigue, hoarseness in the voice, muscular cramps, puffy face, sudden gain in weight, dry skin and brittle nails.

This situation of hyperthyroidism can be controlled using some of the effective home remedies.

Useful Home Remedies
There are certain home remedies, which help to treat the problem of hypothyroidism to a huge extent. The home remedies mentioned below are easily available.

1. BRAHMI
This herb is very useful to treat hyperthyroidism. Latin name of this herb is “Bacopa monnieri”. It releases depression, anxiety, stress, fatigue and tiredness.

Take some leaves of Brahmi and wash it thoroughly.
Consume the fresh leaves of Brahmi on empty stomach daily at morning time to get relief from Hyperthyroidism.
You can also make a paste using the Brahmi leaves or convert the leaves in the form of powder.
Consume the paste or the powdered form with a glass of water.
2. AMLA
Amla is also known as Indian gooseberry. It provides ameliorating impacts on the thyroid gland of the body. The herb helps in proper secretion of the thyroid hormone. This is highly efficient herb.

Take 2 tsps. of Amla powder.
Mix it with 1 tsp of honey to form a thick paste.
Consume this mixture on a daily basis early morning before having breakfast.
3. ASHWAGANDHA
The herb is known as “Withania somnifera”. This is yet another important herb, which helps in the treatment of the hyperthyroidism. It has withanolides and helps to maintain the physical strength of the individuals.

Take the roots and berries of the Ashwagandha herb.
Extract the gel.
Mix the gel with water.
Consume the mixture everyday right in the morning.
Also, the Ashwagandha capsules are readily available in the local medicine shops. One can go and collect from there.
4. CRUCIFEROUS VEGETABLES
It is generally suggested to increase the consumption of the cruciferous vegetables like broccoli, cauliflower, turnip, radish, sprouts and many more to get relief from this metabolic disorder.

Include these vegetables in your daily diet. You can take in salad or soup forms of these vegetables effective in hyperthyroidism.

5. GUGGUL
Guggul is an important herb, which has a lot of medicinal and healing characteristics. This herb has anti-obesity, anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties. It also helps in reducing the level of LDL cholesterol to a huge extent. Guggul has a stimulating action on the T4 hormone and converts it to T3 form. The active components, guggulosterones help in the functioning of the thyroid gland to a huge extent.

Take 25 milligrams of guggul herb.
Consume it three times on a daily basis.
6. GINGER
Latin name of this herb is (Zingiber officinale). Ginger helps to improve the functioning of the thyroid gland effectively. It is highly rich in magnesium, potassium and zinc. The herb has anti-inflammatory and anti-microbial properties.

Cut the ginger into fresh slices.
Add these fresh slices to a cup of boiling water.
Steep the solution for approximately 5 minutes.
Add honey to the solution.
Or

You can also take fresh ginger juice it is also important in hyperthyroidism condition.

The ginger tea is absolutely ready. It is highly efficient in treating the problem of hyperthyroidism.

7. GINSENG
Ginseng helps in stimulation of the thymus and adrenal glands. These maintain the proper functioning of thyroid gland and helps to remove the various symptoms of hyperthyroidism.

Take 200 mg of the extract of the ginseng.
Consume it two times daily.
It is very useful for eliminating the problem of hyperthyroidism.

8. COCONUT OIL
Coconut oil has certain essential fatty acids, which improves the functioning of the thyroid gland. It enhances the body’s metabolism and releases energy.

Take 2 tbsps. of coconut oil.
Add it to milk.
Drink the mixture on a daily basis with breakfast early morning every day.
Or

You can also use coconut oil for cooking food.

This is very effective, especially for the ones with hyperthyroidism condition.

Follow these home remedies and lead a healthy life!!




71. Home Remedies For Idiopathic Thrombocytopenia
Constipation
Introduction
Idiopathic thrombocytopenia is a condition which is becoming quite common in society. Every third person around us whether a child or an adult is a patient of Idiopathic thrombocytopenia. But no study till now has enlightened us about the static occurrence of condition repeatedly in several individuals. Even the individuals diagnosed with the condition may or may not present with any symptoms. The biggest threat is that the condition is becoming more common in young children as well. Imagine a boy or girl just born or born 10 days before suddenly gets diagnosed with ITP or idiopathic thrombocytopenia. Who wants a small child to start suffering the time he or she still lies in the lap of their mothers? The answer is no one. But if that happens then there must be certain ways to keep the situation in our control and for that following home remedies are the best way.

But before starting the home remedies let’s start with knowing the causes of Idiopathic thrombocytopenia.

Causes Of Idiopathic Thrombocytopenia
Idiopathic thrombocytopenia is not a condition whose cause is known to people. Modern science claims this condition to be an autoimmune condition. Autoimmune is a process going on inside the body in which the body starts killing its own healthy cells for no reason. Sometimes it is genetic as well. The mutation is in the genes which are responsible for platelet release.

If understood from the view point of Ayurveda, then this condition is the result of Ama dosha accumulation along with aggravation of pitta dosha and dushti of rakta dhatu. The condition can be directly correlated with the rakta pitta explained in Ayurveda. In case of genetic thrombocytopenia, the cause remains the same along with beeja dushti after or at the time of fertilisation.

Home Remedies For Idiopathic Thrombocytopenia
The home remedies for idiopathic thrombocytopenia are really important because you need something constantly in your diet which can boost your platelets and your haemoglobin as well. These home remedies can definitely help you in boosting and maintaining a good amount of platelets in your body. Following are the most reliable home remedies in case of Idiopathic thrombocytopenia:

1. Remedy One – Red Juice
Red juice is quite a drink. It can be prepared with things which are obviously of red colour like pomegranate, apples, beetroot, half or one carrot and one thing which is green but is important in this juice. It is amla or gooseberries. You can take the juice of one apple, one pomegranate, one beetroot, two gooseberries and two or three black grapes. Mix these well and have this juice at least once in a day. The quantity will be around 100 ml per serving and the same can be given in children as well. If all the ingredients are not available then you can make this juice with one- three ingredients as well.

2. Remedy Two – Green Juice
Green juice is prepared with quite green things. You might be thinking that there are many green things in the market or at a grocery store. Then what to choose? The ingredients that can make the best green juice are spinach, green coriander, mint leaves, gooseberries, papaya leaves, wheat grass, sheesham and moringa. All of these ingredients make perfect green juice to have every morning. The quantity of each ingredient can be taken as spinach-2-3 leaves, Green coriander- 15-20 leaves, mint leaves- 5-6 leaves, wheat grass- 4-5 leaves, papaya leaves- 2, gooseberries- 2, sheesham leaves- 2 and moringa drumstick- 1.

In the mentioned quantity take all ingredients and make a good green juice to have in the morning.

3. Remedy Three – Juice of Papaya Leaves
If nothing can be done like you don’t have ingredients for red juice or green juice or you want to try something extra to maintain your platelets then nothing is better than the juice of papaya leaves. Take two fresh papaya leaves and extract fresh juice. Have freshly extracted papaya juice at least twice daily. This will give you wonderful results.

4. Remedy Four – Giloy Decoction or Juice
Giloy or guduchi is a very famous herb of Ayurveda and of India as well. It not just has an immune modulatory effect but it can mould its effect according to the needs of the body. Giloy decoction of juice can be prepared with a giloy stem. Take a giloy stem and crush it. Boil it in water to make decoction. In case of fresh juice extract the juice from the giloy stem. It can be taken once daily in the quantity of around 50-100ml varying according to age.

5. Remedy Five – Soups
Impressive soups prepared with impressive ingredients serve in this condition really well especially when ITP or idiopathic thrombocytopenia is associated with weakness. A fresh prepared soup of pumpkin or black gram along with cow’s ghee works impressively in this condition. It helps in building a good taste and also strengthens the body as well.

6. Remedy Six – Chutney
A chutney ? How is it going to help? But a simple chutney of pudina (Mint leaves) and dhaniya (green coriander) can be a great help in this condition. It can be used regularly and gives impressive results as well. It can be made fresh everytime or every day and will help in improving platelet count and has its impact on digestion as well.

Do’s and Don’ts For Idiopathic Thrombocytopenia
The list of do’s and don’ts in this condition is not long. It is just like you have quit things which might make your condition or your child’s condition worse. The do’s and don’ts are there in lifestyle and diet. Let’s start with diet.

Do’s and Don’ts in Lifestyle:
Eat according to your appetite
Maintain your sleep wake cycle
Meditate to avoid stress
Watch your digestion
Try to exercise a bit or take a good walk on regular basis
Do’s and Don’ts in Diet:
Avoid the use of heavy pulses
Stop the milk and other dairy products
Avoid the use of green and red chillies
Start with green leafy vegetables
Eat according to the diet chart provided
Stop intake of all citrus food articles including citrus fruits
Stop the use of all type of packed food articles
Each fresh and stay healthy



72. How to Treat Influenza with Home Remedies?
1. Honey
Honey is the best immune booster and also helps to reduce the symptom of common flu. The common flue is an infectious viral disorder that mainly affects the upper respiratory track of the body including the lungs, throat, and nose. The most common symptoms of Influenza are a runny nose, sore throat, headache, dry cough, and high fever. The antioxidant properties of honey protect cells from free radical damage and fights against inflammation. It has also antibacterial and antimicrobial properties which can speed up the healing process.

Home Remedies for Influenza
You can simply take one tablespoon of honey with Luke warm water 2-3 times a day.
Mix one tablespoon of honey with warm water and you can also add lemon juice to it. This drink helps to promote mucus flow and soothe your body. Drink it 3 times a day.
You can also mix one tablespoon of honey with onion juice. You can have this 2-3 times a day until flu is gone.
Mix 1 tablespoon of honey with holy basil juice extract. Take this mixture once a day.
2. Ginger
Ginger has been one of the most popular natural home remedies for influenza and also for many health problems such as cold, fever, and asthma. The warming nature and anti-inflammatory property of Ginger helps to overcome the various symptoms of Influenza. Gingerol is the active compound of Ginger, which promotes healing and reduces headache problem due to Influenza. It has a very good effect on respiratory tract infection, cough, bronchitis, and sore throats. Ginger tea provides relief from throat pain. This herb contains two main phytochemical such as Gingerol and Shagols which has antiprostaglandin, analgesic, hepatoprotective, and antipyretic properties. Along with all these properties, Ginger helps to boost your immune system to protect your body from viruses which causes the Influenza infection.

Add a half teaspoon of grated Ginger to one cup of boiling water for 5-10 minutes.
Leave it for 10 minutes to cool down, strain and add one tablespoon of honey to it.
Drink this 2-3 times a day.
You can also directly eat grate fresh Ginger several times a day.
Mix one tablespoon of grated Ginger, bayberry bark, and powdered cayenne in one cup of boiling water. Drink this 2-4 times a day.
3. Garlic
Garlic has been used in Ayurveda from many years. It reduces all the respiratory problems. The antioxidant property of Garlic neutralizes the free radical attack and protects smooth muscles from contractions. Garlic has antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral and antiseptic properties, all these properties help to overcome the symptoms such as cold, fever, cough and headache. The main immune boosting component of Garlic is Allicin, which provides immunity against foreign particles. According to the Ayurvedic point of view, Garlic is pungent, astringent in taste, hot in potency, and undergoes pungent taste after digestion. It balances the Kapha and Vata Dosha.

Crush a 2-3 clove of Garlic and put them in boiling water for 5 minutes. Strain and leave it for 10 minutes to cool down. Drink it like tea for a 2-3 time a day.
You can also chew one or two Garlic clove with water 2-3 times a day.
4. Fenugreek
Fenugreek is also one of the natural home remedy for the treatment of Influenza, due to its antibacterial, and strong antiviral properties. In Hindi, it is known as Methi. The chemical constituents of Methi are diosgenin, gitogenin, testosides, choline, gitogenin, and neotigogens etc. The Fenugreek is rich in vitamins such as vitamin A, C, K, folic acid, riboflavin, niacin, thiamin, vitamin B6 and minerals such as iron, manganese, magnesium, calcium, copper, and potassium. There are several other medicinal properties of Methi seeds.

Boil one tablespoon of Methi seeds in one cup of water for 10 minutes, strain the solution and then add a few drops of honey and ginger juice to it. Drink this for few days until to get relief from Influenza.
You can also soak one tablespoon of Methi seeds overnight, in the morning strain out the solution and warm up the liquid. Gargle with this warm solution, and it will help to soothe your sore throat.
5. Peppermint
Peppermint is the best herb which provides relief from headache during Influenza. There are some phytochemicals present is Peppermint which has very good properties and provide relief from cough and sore throat. Along with this Peppermint, also have anti-inflammatory and analgesic effect which reduces the swelling in the throat. Peppermint contains compounds such as menthol and menthone which act as an expectorant and relieves your body from congestion and calming the other symptoms of Influenza.

Chop the fresh leaves of Peppermint and boil them in one cup of water for 10 minutes, strain and then add few drops of honey to it. Drink this, 2-3 times a day for instant recovery.
You can also add Peppermint leaves in your salad or soup.
6. Lemon
Lemon is the very good source of vitamin C along with this it has antifungal, antiviral, anti-inflammatory and antibacterial properties. All these properties work together and reduce the symptom of Influenza virus. Lemon juice helps to keep your body hydrated. Black tea helps to soothe a sore throat and you can add lemon and honey to it due to its antioxidant properties.

 Add 1-2 tablespoons of Lemon juice in one cup of hot water. Drink it 2-3 time a day.
Add one tablespoon of honey and lemon into one cup of hot water and drink this 2-3 time a day.
All the home remedies, which are mentioned above are very effective for Influenza flu. Along with these home remedies, you can also try Mustard, Oranges and take steam because it’s an effective method for thinning mucus and making it easy to flush out from your body.



73. Home Remedies for Insomnia
insomnia

Introduction
Insomnia is a sleep disorder that is characterized by staying asleep or difficulty falling asleep. There are variety of causes that lead to insomnia like anxiety, stress, poor sleep habits, chronic pain, life changes, disruptions in sleeping environment, poor sleep habits, caffeine or other stimulants, breathing difficulties and medical conditions like acid reflux, heart failure and arthritis etc. Insomnia condition can be managed by simple home remedies at home.

Home Remedies:-
1. Cinnamon
Cinnamon is one of the best herb for insomnia. It is one of the best mind relaxant.

Process to use this method:-
Take a cup of warm milk add ¼ tsp of cinnamon powder. Drink this milk at bedtime. This preparation will decrease the frustration levels and provides sound sleep to a person.
Prepare an herbal tea by boiling one whole banana in a glass of water for around 10mins. Add cinnamon powder to it. Pour this tea in a cup and add more cinnamon or honey to it. Drink this tea.
2. Peppermint
The presence of menthol in peppermint makes it a good sedative and muscle relaxant. It promotes overall body and mind relaxation. The scent present in peppermint has soothing effect on the brain.

Process to use this method:-
Prepare an herbal tea from peppermint leaves. Boil few peppermint leaves in two cups of water for 15mins. Drink this water.
Peppermint oil help to manage stress, treat mental fatigue and treat nervous disorders. You can use leaves of peppermint by putting it to carrier oil like almond oil, avocado oil and olive oil etc. Massage with this oil at bedtime, to get relief from insomnia.
3. Garlic cloves
Garlic cloves are used since ancient time. The presence of sulfurous compounds in garlic have a calming effect on brain to improve the quality of sleep.

Process to use garlic clove:-
Combine a garlic clove and a glass of milk in a saucepan. Let it boil for three minutes. Remove from heat and let it cool. Add one teaspoon of honey to it. Drink this milk thirty minutes before bedtime.

4. Almonds
The nutrients like iron, zinc, calcium, potassium, magnesium and vitamin B in almonds are very good in insomnia. These nutrients relax the muscles, regulate brain activity and increase the secretion of sleep-inducing compounds such as melatonin. Almonds contains 14 types of amino acids including tryptophan that synthesize serotonin and melatonin level.

Process to use almonds:-
Consume four to five almonds soaked overnight daily.
Prepare a paste of three to four almonds and add it to a glass of warm milk. Have this milk daily at night.
5. Hot milk
Hot milk contains tryptophan that cross the blood-brain barrier in order to have a good sleep. Milk encourage brain to produce calming hormones known as serotonin, which is good for insomnia.

Process to use Hot Milk:-
Drink a glass of hot milk at bedtime for sound sleep.

6. Honey
Honey helps to convert tryptophan into serotonin that promotes relaxation. Serotonin is then converted into melatonin in the pineal gland. Production of melatonin is beneficial for sleeping disorders. It enhances the quality of restorative sleep. Honey contain sufficient amount of glycogen that is necessary for restful sleep.

Process to use Honey:-
Consume one to two tablespoonful of honey at bedtime as it promotes higher quality sleep to get rid of insomnia.

7. Banana
Banana is fully loaded with potassium and magnesium that relax muscles and keep mind calm. It is a wonderful remedy for insomnia.

Process to use banana:-
Prepare a banana tea by adding one cup of water and cinnamon powder to it. Boil this mixture for ten minutes. Drink this mixture before going to sleep.

8. Chamomile Tea
Chamomile contain constituent benzodiazepines, a group of anxiety reducing drugs like Xanax and valium that is beneficial for insomnia. It helps to elevate mood, promote sleep and reduce anxiety.

Process to use chamomile tea:-
Use two to three teaspoons of chamomile leaves to a cup of boiling water. Allow it to steep for fifteen minutes. Drink this tea between meals up to four times a day.



74. HOME REMEDIES FOR IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME (IBS)
Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Irritable bowel syndrome is a severe inflammatory disorder. The colon and other parts of the gastro-intestinal system become swollen. This leads to tenderness and severe pain. Though the particular causes are not yet diagnosed. Yet, too much consumption of hot and spicy food, alcohol and unhealthy lifestyle practices.

COMMON SYMPTOMS OF IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME
Discomfort
Pain
Bleeding
Bloating
Abdominal cramps
Constipation
Diarrhea
Increase in flatulence
Fever
Fatigue
If this disorder is not treated in proper time, it may lead to severe and chronic conditions. Some important home remedies to treat irritable bowel syndrome are given below.

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES FOR IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME
1. KUTAJ
Kutaj is wonderful herb in controlling diarrhea.
Kutaja is also called Vatsak – Holarrhena antidysentrica
Kutaj bark powder can be consumed in 1tsp with a glass of plain water daily 2 times.
2. YOGURT
If you are suffering from diarrhea, yogurt is very helpful.
It prevents the growth of the harmful bacteria.
Yogurt contains acidophilus bacteria.
This fights away the dangerous bacteria and provides relief from diarrhea.
3. GREEN GRASS JUICE
You can make juice of fresh green grass daily once
We call Durva in Ayurveda
This helps to heal condition naturally.
4. FENNEL SEEDS
Another important home remedy for treating this inflammatory condition is fennel seed.
These seeds have wound healing properties and impart soothing action to the body.
It also alleviates the pain and prevents the occurrence of the various symptoms associated with Ulcerative Colitis.
Soak the fennel seeds in warm water overnight and strain the water. Drink the strained water to get relief.



75. HOME REMEDIES FOR KIDNEY DISEASES
Kidney Diseases

Proper and balanced diet plan is must in kidney failure to decreases the load on kidneys. Diet plan and home remedies for kidney diseases is designed according individual’s body constitution, State of disease and general health condition.

Your kidneys filter wastes and excess fluids from your blood which are excreted out through urine. Kidney diseases are also known as kidney failure or renal failure as renal is another name for kidney. In kidney failure, fluids, electrolytes and toxins build up in the body as kidneys are not able to remove them out. In the early stages, patient may not have or have very few signs and symptoms of kidney failure. chronic kidney failure can reach to the stage of end stage renal failure ( ESRD) which leaves with only two options only, either dialysis or kidney transplant. So it is really important to take care of your kidneys and there are various alternative methods or you can say treatments for various kidney diseases.

HERE ARE SOME EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES
Olive oil among all oils has been proved safe for kidneys so it is better if people use olive oil for cooking and that is a better option.
Soak vegetables in water for at least one hour before cooking. This is done to reduce the potassium level.
Basil or Tulsi leaves are good to have every morning as it is immunity modulator and very good antioxidant.
One can have cabbage, apples, reddish, bell peppers, pear, cauliflower, and diet which are high fiber with anti-inflammatory properties.
Green tea being a strong antioxidant is good to have.
TIPS
Boiled food diet is highly recommended.
Eat less at a time and it is better to avoid heavy 2 or three meals.
Avoid alcohol and smoking too.
Avoid diet with items that are rich in potassium like potato, banana, mushroom, spinach, fish, yogurt, white beans, and dried apricots.
Avoid intake of salt or take in very less quantity.
Pranayam that balances sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system is considered to be very useful.
Aasanas like uttanpadasana is recommended which massage kidneys naturally by contracting spine.
Kapal bhati helps to remove toxins and therefore cleanses the blood and decreases workload on kidneys.



76. Home Remedies for Kidney Health
Healthy Kidneys

Kidneys form the major organs of the human body. They flush out the toxic materials from the blood. They also maintain the balance between the alkaline and acidic medium, regulates the fluid level of the body and releases the hormones, which are essential for building the bones, maintaining the blood pressure and having healthy red blood corpuscles.

Kidney’s health deteriorates due to the deposition of the harmful chemicals, corrosive substances and toxic materials in them. Dehydration, ageing and heredity form the contributing factors of kidney problems.

The kidneys are responsible for so many important functions, including filtering toxins from your blood.

Common Symptoms of Kidney Problems
Immense back pain
Fatigue
Urgency to urinate
Swollen feet, hands and legs
Puffy eyes
Skin complications
Vomiting
Nausea
Difficulty in urinating
Useful Home Remedies
1. Watermelon
Watermelon has natural diuretic properties. However, it does not strain the kidneys. Watermelons contain a lot of vitamins, minerals, fibres and proteins, which help to flush out the deposited materials from the kidneys thereby, making it highly effective for treating kidney problems.

2. Garlic
Garlic improves the functioning of the diuretic properties for the proper functioning of the kidneys. The delicious flavor of the garlic helps to reduce inflammation, thereby, maintaining the kidney health.

3. Cabbage
Cabbage is a huge source of the phytochemicals. It is rich in Vitamin D, C and fiber. It also helps in the proper metabolism of the phosphorus in the kidneys.

4. Onion
Onion belongs to the alien family and acts as a flavoring compound. It contains a rich source of aluminium, which helps in the proper metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins and fats.

Also, apples, red bell pepper, cauliflower, cranberry juice, blueberry are the other effective home remedies.

Effective Tips
Beside these home remedies, there are some important tips for treating kidney health.

Useful Tips
To get rid of the kidney problems, following tips shall be remembered:
Keep the body hydrated
Lose the extra weight
Avoid the consumption of alcohol
Follow the above steps correctly and lead a healthy kidneys !!



77. Home Remedies for Leucorrhoea
Leucorrhoea

Very common problem among young ladies is leucorrhoea which is a condition where a thick and sticky discharge releases from their vagina.

Leucorrhoea is a natural defense mechanism which preserves the flexibility of vaginal tissues by lubricating it.

It is not a disease but symptom in some diseases like diabetes, anemia or in some bacterial infections.

Causes of Leucorrhoea
Improper dietary food habits and improper life style.
Excessive intake of heavy, cold, sweet, unctuous and dense foods.
Consumption of too much cheese, yogurt, milk and butter.
Fungal infections.
Constipation.
General weakness, fatigue and emaciated body.
Improper vaginal hygiene.
Hormonal disturbances.
Excess sexual intercourse.
Repeated abortions.
Symptoms of Leucorrhoea
Thick, yellowish white vaginal discharge.
Weakness and fatigue.
Pain in low back or thigh region
Headache
Constipation
Effective Home Remedies for Leucorrhoea
Keep your vaginal area clean by cleaning it 2 to 3 times daily with water. Or use alum with water to wash. Pat dry later with your own towels.
Eat black and ripened bananas every day or make banana milk shake, add pinch of turmeric then drink. Practice this home remedy for a week minimum. This helps you to deal effectively with problem called leucorrhoea.
Boil 3 teaspoon of methi in 1 liter of water for 20 minutes to half an hour, drain and use it for vaginal wash.
Regular douching with decoction prepared with tender guava leaves, bark of banyan tree is considered to be very beneficial.
Soak 3 to 3 lady finger in a big glass of water overnight, early in the morning, drink the water for better results.
Soak I teaspoon full of coriander seeds in a cup of water overnight. Drink it next morning and chew the seeds also.
Prepare tandulodaka (rice water) by boiling 3 tablespoon of rice in 3 cups of water. Drink itevery day after straining.




78. Home Remedies for Liver Detoxification
Liver Detoxification

Liver forms the most essential organ of the body. It secretes bile. This is used for the production of the plasma proteins, storing iron, regulating blood clotting, digestion, regulating amino acid, removing toxic substances from the body and more. The major causes of liver detoxification are stress, alcohol, junk food, smoking and medication. Allergies, weight gain and migraines are some other major causes of liver related problems.

Useful Home Remedies
1. Amla or Gooseberry
This is one of the most common items of every household.
It contains citric acid and is an abundant source of Vitamin C.
It helps to keep the functioning of the liver at an optimum level.
It boosts digestion, enhances the immune system of the body and protects the functioning of the liver.
It treats hepatitis B infection effectively.
2. Licorice or Madhuyesti
People having an increase in the level of the transaminase enzymes are highly benefitted through this home remedy.
It is generally consumed in the form of a tea.
It has anti-ulcer properties and is highly effective to treat liver related complications.
3. Turmeric or Haldi
Turmeric has a lot of medicinal properties.
It contains anti-oxidants, which treat the liver related problems easily.
It provides wonderful treatment for Hepatitis C and B.
Consumption of turmeric mixed milk on a regular basis helps in maintaining the proper functioning of the liver in the human body.
4. Flaxseed
The phycoconstituents present in the flaxseeds help the body hormones to bind with the receptor sites and prevent them from getting circulated in the vascular system of the body.
Sprinkling a small amount of flaxseed in the crushed form on the salad or toast makes the liver functioning quite healthy and easy
5. Vegetables
Some vegetables like cabbage, beet, broccoli, carrot, garlic, onion help the liver to secrete larger amount of the enzymes. These help in carrying out the liver detoxification reactions efficiently and protect the liver from any damage.

Apart from these home remedies, it is highly recommended to drink a lot of fluid in the form of water and herbal tea. This prevents the formation of stones and helps in cleaning the liver and maintaining an efficient liver functioning system of the body.

Tips
Eat more leafy vegetables and fresh fruits.
Eat plenty of water.
Avoid constipation.
Avoid spicy junk foods.
Exercise regularly.



79. Home Remedies to Lower Cholesterol
Lower Cholesterol

Cholesterol is an important part of the body. It is yellow in color. It is categorized in two categories – the low density lipids (LDL) and high density lipids (HDL). Presence of HDL in an individual lowers the cardio vascular risk. The presence of LDL in an individual may be highly dangerous. The amount of cholesterol in the blood is usually measured in milligrams per 100 milliliter of blood. The more the LDL to cholesterol ratio in the body, the more pone are the individuals to heart attacks and cardiac arrests. The situation, where the LDL level increases in the body is called Hypercholesterolaemia.

Too much intake of dairy items, red meat, and addiction to drug, smoking and heredity are the major reasons of increase in cholesterol level in the blood of the individuals.

COMMON SYMPTOMS OF HYPERCHOLESTEROLAEMIA
The important symptoms of hypercholesterolaemia are:
Yellow marks on the eyelids
Temporary vision loss
Dizziness
Pain in the calf muscles
Abdominal cramps
Paresis
To get rid of these symptoms and the hypercholesterolaemic condition, there are certain home remedies, which should be followed.

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES TO LOWER CHOLESTEROL
1. ORANGE JUICE
Consuming two glasses of orange juice every morning is highly effective for treating hypercholesterolaemia. The juice contains fortified sterols, which bring down the level of the LDL content in the blood.

2. OLIVE OIL
Olive oil has monounsaturated fats. It lowers the level of high insulin and helps to lose weight effectively. Also, it reduces the chances of cardiac arrests and is an effective home remedy for lowering cholesterol in the blood.

3. FIBER RICH FOOD ITEMS
Products, which are rich in fiber like oats, bran, whole bread, whole grain, barley have soluble fibers. These absorb the LDL cholesterol from the blood. This helps to lower the ratio of the LDL to HDL in the blood.

4. GREEN TEA
Consumption of green tea is extremely effective in lowering the level of cholesterol in the blood. Green tea has antioxidants, which help to fight away LDL from the blood. Drink 2 cups of green tea daily.

These are some of the effective home remedies for lowering cholesterol. Follow them and lead a healthy life !!



80. HOME REMEDIES TO INCREASE HEMOGLOBIN
Hemoglobin

INTRODUCTION
A deficiency in the hemoglobin reduces blood’s oxygen carrying capacity. This in turn leads to decrease in the count of the red blood cells. This situation is known as Anemia. The major reasons of decrease in hemoglobin is blood loss, cancer therapy, poor nutrition, diseases including bone marrow, some drugs and diseases like kidney disorder or cancer and many others.

COMMON SYMPTOMS OF REDUCTION IN THE LEVEL OF HEMOGLOBIN
Lethargy
Dizziness
Pale skin
Organ failure
Fatigue
Weakness
Irregular heartbeats
Shortness of breath
Dizziness or lightheadedness
Chest pain
Cold hands and feet
Headache
EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES TO INCREASE HEMOGLOBIN
1. FOODS RICH IN IRON
Low level of hemoglobin is mainly due to the deficiency of iron in the blood. This can be treated by including foods which is rich in iron in your diet. Legumes like lentils and beans, leafy vegetables like spinach and artichoke, cereals, whole egg, seafood and meat are the rich sources of iron.

2. VITAMIN C RICH FOODS
Low level of hemoglobin can be due to the deficiency of Vitamin C as well. This can be treated by consuming foods rich in Vitamin C. Red and green pepper, kiwifruit, citrus fruits, broccoli, cantaloupe, tomatoes and baked potatoes are the wonderful sources of Vitamin C.

3. FOODS RICH IN FOLIC ACID
The hemoglobin count may be low since the body fails to produce red blood cells. And this may occur due to the deficiency of the folic acid. The food items like leafy vegetables, citrus fruits, peas, dried beans, some of the important sources of folic acids are extremely helpful in increasing the hemoglobin count considerably.

4. DRIED HERBS
Dried herbs like Tulsi, Pudina, Dhania, Parsley and Tejpatta may be added to the diet. This helps to improve the level of hemoglobin in the blood to a huge extent.

IMPORTANT TIPS TO INCREASE HEMOGLOBIN LEVEL
Avoid the consumption of food items with a huge quantity of calcium in it like cheese and milk
Reduce the intake of the foods rich in dietary fibers.
Do not drink beverages like tea, coffee and alcohol.
Also, avoid having foods containing gluten like bread, wheat products and pasta.
All these home remedies are absolutely important to increase the hemoglobin level of the blood. These prevent the dangerous disease called anemia and help to lead a healthy life !!



81. Home Remedies for Migraines
Migraine

Migraine is very painful. And it is very common in individuals these days. Due to heavy work pressure and over loaded schedule, migraine is gaining popularity these days. It causes an increase in the throbbing or pain in one part of the head. The head is so intense that the individual feels a pulsing sensation in him. Medical science has termed it as the neurological disorder.

The major causes are still unknown. Heredity and environmental factors play the most important roles to cause this disorder. Alteration of mood, irritability, fatigue, hallucination, depression, diarrhea, constipation, excessive pain and weaknesses are the major symptoms of migraines. The pain is often followed by vomiting and nausea. The situation further worsens on being exposed to sound and light.

HOME REMEDIES FOR MIGRAINES
1. CAYENNE
This spice contains capsaicin. This component is very helpful in treating pain and swelling. The severity of headaches and migraine can be well reduced with the help of the capsaicin. Mix half tsp of cayenne powder in warm water. Soak a cotton ball in the solution and apply it inside the nostrils. It may be not very pleasant initially. But, it is very effective in treating migraines.

2. NUTS
This is another important home remedy. It contains salicin. It is a healthier remedy over the OTC medicines. It alleviates pain and provides relief from the various symptoms effectively. Consume handful of nuts daily. These act as the pain relievers.

3. FISH OIL CONTAINING OMEGA 3 FATTY ACIDS
The fish oil, which has omega 3 fatty acids helps in reducing the tremendous pain of migraine. It reduces inflammation, prevents clotting of blood, reduces blood pressure and maintains the rhythm of heart. Tuna, salmon, sardine, mackerel are some of the fishes, which help in getting rid of migraine to a huge extent.

Beside these home remedies, there are certain important tips to treat migraine.

TIPS
Drink a lot of water.
Make improvement in the posture.
Stretch yourself and relax as much as possible.
You can also go for the caffeinated beverages
These are some of the effective home remedies and tips to get rid of migraine and the various symptoms of migraines.

Follow them to avoid the tremendous pain and other symptoms correctly !!




82. Home Remedies for Nasal Blockage
Nasal Blockage

Nasal Blockage is also known as Stuffy nose. This occurs when there exists inflammation in the cavity of the nose, which leads to the deposition of the mucous. This situation can be extremely annoying and can further lead to restlessness, insomnia, ear infections, etc.

The symptoms include the following :
Flu
Cold
Allergic reaction
Difficulty in breathing
Home Remedies to Treat Nasal Blockage
1. Garlic
Garlic has antimicrobial characteristics. It possesses antifungal, antiviral and antibacterial characteristics to combat respiratory disorders. Boil two garlic cloves in a cup of water. Drink the mixture till the congestion gets cleared off. It is one of the best home remedies for nasal congestion. It provides relief from congestion and stiffness.

2. Apple Cider Vinegar
This is abundant in various nutrients, which are extremely beneficial for maintaining good health and immune system. It helps in thinning the mucous and clearing of the stuffy nose. Mix two tablespoons of apple cider vinegar with one tablespoon of honey in a cup of warm water. Drink this mixture twice or thrice for a few days daily.

3. Eucalyptus Oil
This oil possesses anti-inflammatory and decongestant properties. It is extremely helpful for treating nasal congestion. Put two drops of eucalyptus oil in a fresh handkerchief. Breathe in the fresh aroma. Repeat this for a few numbers of times all throughout the day. You will definitely get relief from the congestion.

4. Inhalation Therapy
This therapy acts as a natural way to clear off the congestion. It aids in lubricating the respiratory tract and is a popular home remedy for nasal congestion. Add one teaspoon of crushed carom seeds to coiling water. Breathe in the steam keeping the head about an arm’s length away from the bowl, which you are breathing in.

Remember, Steam inhalation is not recommended for children, pregnant women and individuals suffering from cardiac problems, high blood pressure and nervous disorders.

5. Saline Solution
Use saline solution to treat nasal congestion effectively. It washes away the mucous and other irritants from the nasal passages. Mix one teaspoon of salt in two cups of distilled water. Use a netipot for nasal irrigation. Repeat the procedure once or twice for a few days on a daily basis.

Follow the home remedies and get rid of the congestion and blockages and enjoy a relieved life !!



83. Home Remedies for Numbness
Numbness

Numbness in feet and hands refers to lack of sensation. It is quite a common problem.Causes for numbness are exposure to cold materials, compression of nerves, injury of the nerves, too much alcohol drinking, fatigue, smoking, lack of magnesium and Vitamin B12 and deficiency of proper amount of physical activities. Sometimes, due to certain physiological complications like diabetes, multiple sclerosis, migraines, hyperthyroidism and many others, numbness may be the result.

The major symptoms of numbness are a sharp pain, tingling sensation, burning feeling and weakness. This is a very discomforting situation. However, it can be treated with certain home remedies.

HOME REMEDIES FOR NUMBNESS
Following are the home remedies, which help to get rid of the tingling sensation effectively.
1. TURMERIC
It contains curcumin, the compound which acts as an anti oxidant and helps in maintaining an effective blood circulation in the body.

Take a tsp of turmeric powder.
Add it to a glass of warm milk
Mix throroughly.
Drink the solution on a regular basis once.
2. CINNAMON
It possesses a lot of nutrients and chemicals. These include potassium, manganese and Vitamin C, which help to improve the circulation of blood in the body.

Take a tsp of cinnamon powder.
Mix it with the warm milk.
Drink the mixture atleast once daily.
You can also add 1 tsp of each honey and cinnamon powder
Drink the paste every day morning for a couple of weeks.
3. GINGKO BILOBA
It is a popular Ayurvedic herb, which is easily available at home. It helps in improving the circulation of blood in the body. It prevents the numbness sensation. It is readily available in the medical stores in the form of various supplements. But, it must be consumed only after proper consultation with the medical practitioners.

4. WATER
Drinking a lot of water helps in preventing dehydration. This helps to flush out the waste materials from the body and help in an effective blood circulation.

Besides these, the individuals must increase the consumption of foods rich in magnesium, Vitamin B and do some amount of massage of the affected areas to get relief.



84. Home Remedies for Nephritis
Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Kidney is one of the most important organs of our body. And Nephritis is a major and serious complication of the kidneys. Nephritis is characterized by general inflammation of both or one of the kidneys. Nephritis can be classified into chronic and acute. There are many different types of classifications of nephritis as well. These are Glomerulonephritis, Lupus nephritis, Pyelonephritis and Interstitial Nephritis. Chronic nephritis is such that it may not show any symptoms for approximately 30 years. However, the major symptoms of nephritis include the following.

Symptoms of Nephritis
Blood in the urine
Lethargy
Loin pain
Sleeping problem
Headache
Protein in urine
Edema or swelling
Weight loss
Frequent urination
The major cause of nephritis is the allergy caused due to the exposure of the drugs. Certain bacteria and virus may also give rise to this complicated problem. High blood pressure and diabetes are some of the important causes of nephritis.

SOME EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES FOR NEPHRITIS
1. CARROT JUICE
Make a mixture of carrot juice, 1 tsp of honey and some fresh lime juice. Drink this mixture right in the morning. This is an effective home remedy for treating nephritis.

2. GRAPES
Grapes contain little amount of sodium chloride and albumin. This makes it highly effective for treating nephritis.

3. AVOCADOS
Avocados do not contain a lot of proteins. Instead, they contain lots of minerals, which are required for the treatment of nephritis.

4. COCONUT WATER
Coconut water has diuretic property. Drink the water of one coconut two times on a daily basis. This is highly effective for nephritis.

5. PROPER FRUIT DIET
It is advised to follow a proper diet comprising the various fruits including peaches, pineapples, oranges, apples, pears, grapes and peaches. This diet is simply superb for nephritis.

TIPS
Drink plenty of water
Avoid meat, junk food
Stay away from foods containing oxalates like chocolate, spinach.
Get rid of fried foods completely at least till you recover.
Get rid of alcohol and tobacco.
Carry out exercises regularly.




85. Home Remedies For Nephrotic Syndrome
Constipation
Introduction
Kidneys are a very vital organ of the human body. As the human body grows old so do human kidneys. But sometimes the conditions related to kidneys can develop early. One of such conditions that affects both young children and adults is nephrotic syndrome. Nephrotic syndrome is a kidney disorder which results in too much protein loss from the body through the urinary route. The condition is caused due to the damaged cluster of small blood vessels (Glomeruli) which are responsible for filtering waste and excess water from the body. This results in the appearance of a variety of symptoms like protein in urine, low amounts of blood albumin, high blood lipids and significant swelling. Other symptoms may also include weight gain, feeling tired and foamy urine. This condition has its prevalence in fewer than 5 in 100,000 children worldwide and the adult ratio is approximately 3 per 100,000 every year. The nephrotic syndrome can also develop as a complication of diabetes, lupus and many other conditions which can be autoimmune as well.

Causes Of Nephrotic Syndrome
The causes of this condition can be many. Yes, it can be the result of an already ongoing condition like diabetes, lupus, minimal change disease, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, membranous neuropathy and many others. Or this condition can occur independently under the autoimmune process going on inside the body. Certain infections like HIV, Hepatitis B or C can also cause it.

If understood from the view point of Ayurveda then the condition is the result of Pitta dosha aggravation in the body. It is really important to understand the condition if you really want to manage it using ayurveda and ayurvedic herbs.

So with proper understanding, following are the home remedies that help in recovering the Albumin loss from the body and also help in kidney cells protection along with regeneration.

Home Remedies For Nephrotic Syndrome
So, starting with the home remedies for nephrotic syndrome, it is really important to understand that maintaining the levels of albumin is the most important thing in this situation as it’s being lost from the urinary route. Following are the remedies to maintain Albumin levels in Body in this situation:

1. Remedy One – The Mixture
This includes using four types of seeds to make a powdered mixture. Take 100 gms of pumpkin seeds, cucumber seeds, melon seeds and water melon seeds each. Blend them into a fine powder and store in a glass jar. Remember the powder must not catch moisture. This mixture can be given to any patient of nephrotic syndrome whether it’s a child or an adult. These four seeds are the great source of albumin and thus helps a lot in this situation.

Dose: Half tsp twice for children and one tsp twice for adults after meals with warm water.

2. Remedy Two – Sprouts
The sprouts are impressively nourishing. They are a high source of protein and are full of vitamins and fibre as well. Sprouts of green gram and black gram are really helpful in case of nephrotic syndrome. They should be served in a quantity of 100 gms twice or thrice daily. Mostly twice is considered but according to need, appetite and digestive strength they can be given. Plus point is it can be given in children as well as in adults.

3. Remedy Three – Decoction
A decoction of turmeric can also help impressively in this case. Take half teaspoon of turmeric and boil it in 80-100 ml of water. Reduce the solution to half and give it to the patient. This decoction can be given twice daily and should be freshly prepared every time. Turmeric has an impressive effect in autoimmune conditions like nephrotic syndrome.

4. Remedy Four – Sattu
A sattu of jau (Barley) will work brilliantly in this case. Why? Because it is rich in various micro nutrients like iron, manganese, magnesium and low on sodium. Thus help in excreting the excess of water retention, make the patient feel more energetic and also help in pitta dosha pacification due to its cooling effect. It is a rich source of fibre thus has its impact on digestion as well (it improves digestion).

5. Remedy Five – Mushrooms
Mushrooms are the known source of plant based protein and help in balancing the loss of protein going on inside the body. Any type of mushroom can be used because the entire mushroom family is having this quality. Tossed mushrooms in cow’s ghee can be given to the patient in 50-80 gms of quantity. This is applicable in both adults and childrens.

Do’s and Don’ts For Nephrotic Syndrome
There are certain do’s and don’ts which are important in the case of nephrotic syndrome. One has to do these changes in lifestyle as well in diet style. Specific things which are triggering the condition are to understand and abstinence has to be done. As nephrotic syndrome is common in many conditions we also have to abstain from the causes which are responsible for aggravating the underlying condition.

Firstly about Diet, Following are the things that are to be added in your diet:

Choose lean sources of protein. Plant-based protein is helpful in kidney disease.
Reduce the amount of fat and cholesterol in your diet to help control your blood cholesterol levels.
Eat a low-salt diet to help control swelling and switch to saindhav lavan or pink salt for better results.
Reduce the amount of liquid in your diet.
Avoid having milk and other dairy products.
Cow’s ghee can be taken on regular basis.
Heavy pulses are to be avoided.
Citrus fruits and other citrus things are to be avoided.
If The patient is diabetic, he or she must stop the intake of bananas, white rice and potatoes. But a non diabetic can have these three.
Secondly about Lifestyle, Lifestyle is to be changed. Like the sleep wake cycle is to be maintained. In the case of children such changes are to be maintained by parents.

In case of any other underlying condition, the reasons for the aggravation of the primary condition are to be controlled.
Medications causing damage to kidneys are to be discontinued.
Necessary alterations in lifestyle are to be done which will eventually improve the condition for good. In case of both adults and children.



86. Top 7 Home Remedies for Oily Skin
Tired of using everything for oily skin!!!!! Here we are listing some home remedies which will be beneficial to ward off oily skin problems like acne, pimples, whiteheads, blackheads etc. Follow these home remedies for a specific period of time and be patient as the natural things take some time to show their results.

Home Remedies for Oily Skin
1. Milk
Milk is amazing home remedy for those who complain for oily skin. It is considered as the natural oil free cleanser for making the oily skin soft and supple. Milk comprises the alpha hydroxy acids which smoothly exfoliate the skin and also aids in maintaining the skin’s natural pH balance.

How to use?
Mix two or three drops of lavender oil or sandalwood in two tablespoons of milk.
Dab the cotton ball in the mixture and apply it on your face.
Gently massage the skin for a few minutes to improve blood circulation.
Then sleep and in the morning, wash your face with cold water.
Repeat it daily.
Top 7 Home Remedies for Oily Skin
2. Egg White
Being a good source of vitamin, egg white works well for dry out the skin. Additionally it helps to tighten and tone up the oily skin.

How to use?
Take an egg and break it.
Beat the egg white until it turns stiff.
Spread it uniformly on your skin.
Allow it to dry and then wash it off with warm water.
Repeat it twice in a week.

Alternatively


Whip the egg white and add lemon juice in it.  
Apply the mixture on your face and let it for 15 minutes and then rinse it off with warm water. This home remedy will help to absorb the excess oil and also tighten the skin.
3. Lemon Juice
Lemon juice is another amazing home remedy for oil skin. It is good source of citric acid which works like an astringent for skin. Its antiseptic properties help in lightening of skin discolorations.

How to use?
Combine one teaspoon of fresh lemon juice with one-half teaspoon of distilled water.
Dip cotton ball in the mixture and apply it on skin.  
Let it for 10 minutes and then wash it off your face with warm water.
After that apply some oil-free herbal moisturizer afterward.
Do this once daily.
Alternatively

Mix one tablespoon of lemon juice with one tablespoon of milk and one-half tablespoon of honey.
Apply this paste on your face and leave it for 10 to 15 minutes then it off with cold water.
Repeat it daily.
4. Cucumbers
For oily skin, cucumber home remedy is capable to give you the pleasant and satisfactory results. Cucumber is rich in vitamins A, E and minerals like magnesium and potassium which are quite beneficial for skin cleansing and making it softer.

How to use?
Cut a fresh cucumber into thick slices and rub them on your entire face.
Leave it for overnight and in the morning rinse it with warm water.
Do this daily before going to bed.
Alternatively

Combine the one teaspoon each of cucumber juice and lemon juice.
Apply this mixture to your skin and leave it until it gets dry then wash it off with warm water.
Do this daily.
5. Yogurt
Yogurt is one of the most widely used home remedies for oily face as it contains lactic acid which aid in exfoliating the skin.

How to use?
Take one tablespoon of plain yogurt and apply thoroughly over your face and leave it on for 15 minutes.
Then wash it off with cool water.
 Do this once daily.
Alternatively

Mix one tablespoon each of organic yogurt and finely minced oatmeal with one teaspoon of warm honey.
Apply the mixture on your face. Leave it on for 10 to 15 minutes and then rinse with warm water.
6. Tomatoes
Tomatoes are packed with oil-absorbing acids, which can help to clear the excessive oil. Additionally it is the rich source of vitamin C that is helpful for acne prone skin. Its cooling, clarifying and astringent properties make it a fruitful home remedy for oily skin.

How to use?
Cut a tomato and rub it on your face.
Allow the tomato juice to soak into your skin and leave it at least for 15 minutes.
Rinse your face with cold water.
Pat it dry and apply a light oil-free moisturizer.
Alternatively

Combine three – four tablespoons of tomato juice with one tablespoon of honey for making a face pack.

7. Honey
Honey possess the moisturizing properties which nourish the skin without making it oily. It helps to clear the pores and also avert wrinkles. In addition, natural antiseptic property of honey is extremely helpful for acne-prone oily skin.

How to use?
Put on a thin layer of honey over your face.
Leave it for 15 minutes.
Wash your face with water.
Do this daily.



87. Home Remedies for Optic Neuritis
Optic Neuritis

Optic neuritis is defined as a medical condition, which is characterized by the inflammation of the nerves of the eyes. When a multiple number of nerves are affected, the situation is known as the Polyneuritis and when only one nerve is affected, the situation is mononeuritis. Lack of Vitamin B12, too much consumption of alcohol, smoking, accumulation of excess harmful body fluids in the body of the individuals are some of the major reasons, which lead to Optic Neuritis.

Symptoms of Optic Neuritis
Loss of vision
Pain in the eyes
Fever
Headache
Nausea
Chicken pox
Measles
Mumps
Important home remedies for Optic Neuritis
1. Soybean milk
The soybean milk has a lot of healing properties. It helps to fight away inflammation and pain to a huge extent. Add 1 tsp of honey to a cup of soybean milk. Drink the solution. It is highly effective in treating the complication of Optic Neuritis to a huge extent.

2. Juice of Carrot and Spinach
Both carrots and spinach are wonderful sources of Vitamin A. This nutrient helps to solve the various complications related to eyes and vision easily. Mix equal quantity of the juice of the carrot and spinach. Drink the solution. It is very useful to treat Optic neuritis.

3. Yogurt
Another superb home remedy for Optic neuritis is the yogurt. Vitamin B1 and B12 are extremely useful for treating optic neuritis effectively. Yogurt has the potential to carry out the catalysis and produce bacteria, which help in producing the essential vitamins in the body of the individuals.

4. Pineapple
Yet another effective home remedy, which helps to treat the situation of Optic neuritis to a huge extent in the pineapple. Extract the juice of the pineapple and drink it on a daily basis. This is highly useful.

Thus, these home remedies are extremely beneficial in treating the complications of Optic Neuritis to a huge extent. These provide relief from inflammation, pain and other symptoms and help to lead a healthy life.



88. Home Remedies for Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis defined as the deterioration of the bones. The tissues and the masses of the bones decrease, which leads to the weakening of the bones. Osteoporosis works as a silent killer as there are no particular symptoms for the situation. It makes the bones completely porous. This condition may lead to fractures in the wrist, spines and hips. Even the younger ones are affected by osteoporosis significantly these days.

Home remedies for Osteoporosis
These home remedies are extremely effective. Certain home remedies for osteoporosis are as follows:
1. Banana
Banana is a wonderful home remedy for osteoporosis. Banana is a rich source of potassium. This helps to maintain a balance of the blood level in the body. This, in turn, prevents the consumption of calcium. The calcium is restored in the body. This prevents osteoporosis. It is highly recommended for women.

2. Sprouts
Sprouts are highly rich in Vitamin K. It helps to keep the bone density intact. This prevents the occurrence of the trouble related to the low bone density It is advised to consume sprouts regularly. This helps to maintain the bone density preventing osteoporosis.

3. Dandelion Tea
This herbal tea is another important home remedy for osteoporosis. It is filled with a lot of anti-oxidants and anti-microbial properties. It helps in preventing the oozing out of the calcium from the bones of the individuals. This is extremely important for preventing osteoporosis. Drink a cup of dandelion tea, prevent osteoporosis and stay healthy.

4. Apple
It is well known that calcium is required for the building up of the bones. But, boron is an important mineral, which helps in retaining calcium in the body. It also behaves as an estrogen replacement. Apple is highly rich in boron. It is recommended to add apples in the regular diet. This prevents osteoporosis.

Important Tips to prevent Osteoporosis
Practice exercises regularly
Massage the area with oil. This prevents the accumulation of the vata in the various parts.
Do not smoke. It prevents the risk of calcium loss from the body of the individuals.
Thus, follow the home remedies and the tips and lead a healthy life !!



89. Top 7 Home Remedies for Piles
Piles are categorized among the most embarrassing and disgusting health problems. But certain natural things available in kitchen can be your savoir to overcome this disease. Follow the below given home remedies and surely you will observe the noticeable change in your condition.

Note – Prolonged constipation is major cause of this problem. In the morning if you don’t have go and get up feeling then you are at the risk of getting piles.

Home Remedies for Piles
1. Black Cumin Seeds
Black Cumin Seeds are an effective home remedy for piles. Black cumin seeds consumption support the good health of digestive system and provide relief in problems like peptic disorder, gastritis, indigestion, bloating, bowel movements, flatulence, hurt burn and stomachaches. Additionally it helps in easy bowel movements.

Directions to use:-
Make the powder of black cumin seeds.
Roast it and consume ½ teaspoon of roasted powder with one glass of water daily.
Another option is to mix one tablespoon of powder with water for making a paste. Apply this paste on your anal region and leave it for about 15-20 minutes. Do this twice a day.
Top 7 Home Remedies for Piles
2. Radish Juice
Treating the piles at home, radish juice is among the best home remedies. It acts as a natural laxative and aids in easy passing and loosening of stools. It helps in removal of waste material from body.

Directions to use:-
Grind the fresh radish to make the juice. Initially start consuming 1/4 cup of this juice then increase up to ½ cup twice daily morning and night.
Mix 1 tablespoon of grated radish with 1 teaspoon of honey. Have it two times daily.
Make a paste of grated radish with milk. Apply this paste on piles and around anal opening. Leave it for about 15-20 minutes and then it wash off. Repeat it twice daily in order to alleviate pain and inflammation.
3. Figs
For treating the piles or hemorrhoids good health of digestive system is essential. Laxative properties of figs relieve the problem of constipation and also helps in easy bowel movements. Whereas the anti-inflammatory properties of figs work well to provide the relief in pain and inflammation associated with piles.

Directions to use:-
Take 3-4 figs and soak them in water for overnight.
In the morning on an empty stomach consume those figs along water.
Repeat it at least for a month to observe the noticeable change.
4. Bitter Gourd Juice
Everyone is aware about the anti-diabetic properties of bitter gourd juice. But do you know that laxative properties of bitter gourd are quite beneficial for treating piles. Being a great source of fibre it helps to relieve the constipation and regulates the easy bowel movements.

Directions to use:-
Make the fresh bitter gourd juice and consume 30-40 ml twice daily in the morning.

5. Buttermilk
In order to manage the symptoms associated with piles like swelling and irritation, buttermilk is placed among the top home remedies.

Directions to use:-
Add a pinch of salt in a glass of buttermilk and drink it every day. Another option is add 1/4 teaspoon of carom seed powder in one glass of buttermilk. Consume it daily.

6. Aloe Vera
Aloe vera juice is an ideal home remedy to resolve the digestive problems like constipation, acidity and flatulence which are major cause of piles. It is loaded with anti – inflammatory properties which help to reduce the pain in piles. Therefore use of Aloe vera is good for both internal and external hemorrhoids.

How to apply?
Take out the gel from fresh leaves of aloe vera and put it in mixer to make juice. Consume 20 ml of juice with equal quantity of water two times that is early morning empty stomach and 1 hour before dinner.
For treating the external piles, apply some amount of aloe vera gel on affected area and massage gently.
7. Triphala
It is prepared by the combitaion of three fruits that is Indian gooseberry (Emblica officinalis), Bibhitaki (Terminalia bellerica) and Haritaki (Terminalia chebula). Being a rich source of fibre it is good home remedy for piles.

How to use?
Take 1-2 teaspoon of triphala powder before going to bed at night. Or you can soak coarse powder of triphala in water overnight and take in the morning after filtration.



90. Top 7 Foods to Eat During Pregnancy
Pregnancy, also known as gestation period, is the period during which offspring develops inside a woman. And in such a condition, when body needs supplementary nutrients, vitamins and minerals, a healthy diet is extremely mandatory to maintain. During 2nd and 3rd trimesters, pregnant women need around 350-500 more calories, surplus proteins and calcium to meet the needs of the growing fetus. Choosing healthy and nutritious diet helps to ensure the health of the mother and the baby.

Top 7 Foods to Eat During Pregnancy
1. Dairy Products
Dairy products are abundant in proteins, certain B-vitamins, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium and zinc. Yogurt, especially Greek yogurt, is particularly profitable for gestating women. It accommodates more calcium than any other dairy product. Some varieties of yogurt also contain probiotic bacteria, which support digestive health and immune system. Probiotic supplements helps to reduce the risk of obstacles that might happen during pregnancy, complications like preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, vaginal infections and allergies. Consume dairy products precisely.

Top 7 Foods to Eat During Pregnancy
2. Sweet Potatoes
As we all know sweet potatoes are over-flowed with beta-carotene, it later is converted into vitamin A in the body. Sweet potatoes helps in growth and differentiation of most cells and tissues, proved to be very helpful for developing fetus. Pregnant women are usually recommended to take vitamin A in large amounts nearly 10-40%more than the normal regular days. Additionally, sweet potatoes are comprised of lots of fibers which increase fullness, shorten blood sugar spikes and improve digestive health and movability. Therefore, beta-carotene is a vital source of vitamin A for pregnant mother.

3. Eggs
Ultimate healthy food enriched with every essential nutrient one need during pregnancy. Moreover, eggs contain vitamins, minerals, high quality protein and fat. It is a rich source of choline. During pregnancy, high choline intake helps to reduce the risk of neural defects and possibly lead to increased brain function. A single whole egg dwells nearly 113 mg of choline, which is roughly 25% of the advised daily intake for pregnant women. Recommended choline consumption in pregnancy is 450 mg.

Take eggs directly to stay healthy.

4. Legumes
Legumes are marvelous plant based sources rich in all nutrients and minerals such as fiber, iron, magnesium, potassium, folate (B-vitamins), protein and calcium, generally include lentils, peas, beans, chickpeas, soybeans and peanuts. These all are highly advisable in pregnancy. B-vitamins, mostly folates, are very beneficial during first trimester for the fitness of the mother and fetus. Insufficient folate (B9) consumption might lead to an increased risk of neural tube defects and low birth weight. Furthermore, cause the new one to be more prone to infections and diseases later in life. Make pulses as you prefer and consume them.

5. Berries
Berries are bursting with water, healthy carbohydrates, minerals, vitamin C, fibers and plant compounds along with tangy flavors. Berries contain high amounts of vitamin C which helps in absorption of iron. These have relatively low glycemic index value, so do not cause major spikes in blood sugar. Berries are also a great snack because these contain both water and fiber. Berries provide lot of flavor and nutrition, but with relatively few calories.

6. Fish Liver Oil
Fish liver oil is made from the oily liver of cod fish, very nutritional supplement with high levels of omega-3 fatty acids:-

Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA),
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA),
These are necessary for the development of brain and eye of the fetal. Fish liver oil is highly rich in vitamin D, helpful for those who don’t eat seafood or supplement with vitamin D or omega-3. Deficiency of vitamin D has been allied with an increased risk of pre-eclampsia. Pre-eclampsia is very hazardous complication of pregnancy characterized by high blood pressure, swelling of the hands and feet and a large amount of protein content in the urine. This disorder usually occurs after the 20th week of pregnancy and gets worse and worse with time. So intake of this cod oil helps in higher birth weight during gestation and diminish the risk of any disease later in the baby’s life.

7. Broccoli And Dark, Leafy Greens
Broccoli and green vegetables, such as kale, spinach, mustard greens all contain many of the nutrients that pregnant women generally need during their crucial period of life. Leafy greens or potherbs are always better because we get these directly from the nature’s lap, include various vitamins like vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin K, fiber, calcium, iron, folate and potassium. Furthermore, these are rich in antioxidants as well. They also contain plant compounds that asset the immune system and digestive system. Due to their high fiber content level, these vegetables help to prevent the constipation also, occurs mostly among pregnant women.

Hope these top foods may help you during your pregnancy and benefits a lot.



91. Blepharitis And Certain Home Remedies To Prevent Dandruff On Eyelashes And Eyebrows
Blepharitis, Symptoms of Blepharitis, Causes of Blepharitis, Ayurvedic view on Blepharitis, Home remedies, Home remedies to prevent dandruff on eyelashes & eyebrows
Introduction
Blepharitis is the most common eye disease. It is the sub-acute or chronic inflammation of the eyelid. It is having distinguished features like scaling, redness and inflammation. Some patients may also experience foreign body sensation and graining. In spite of the fact that it is not sight threatening, it may lead to permanent remodeling of eyelids. It has a number of causes but the leading cause is congested meibomian gland. This study illustrates the detailed description about the disease and its ayurvedic management.

Symptoms of Blepharitis
Symptoms may vary from person to person as due to the underlying cause. Here are all symptoms mentioned in all the varying conditions:

Swollen or inflamed eyes
Red eyes
Watery eyes
Nagging and itching eyelids
Gluing of eyelids
Flaking of underlying skin
Crusted eyelids
Foreign body sensation
Increased reactivity to light
Blurred vision
Causes Of Blepharitis
Exact cause of blepharitis is not understandable but we are mentioning some of the known conditions that may lead to this disease. A person might be present with one or more of these causes:

Malfunctioning of meibomiam gland
Dandruff of scalp and eyebrows
Any type of external irritants like smoke, dust, cosmetics, allopathic topical medications
Unhygiene
Allergic reactions
Excessive intake of carbohydrates
Parasitic infections – infection from pediculis pubis (black nits)
Ayurvedic View Of Blepharitis
In ayurveda it is known with the name of krimigranthi. It is the disease condition of netra sandhi. According to acharya charaka (su. u. 2/9) different types of parasites, like nits, maggots by depriving pakshama (eyelashes) and vartama (eyelid) joints produce itching and small cysts on the eyelid margin with the spread of infection. According to acharya vaghbhata (A.h. u. 10/9) there is itching, burning sensation, purulent secretion from the cyst in inner and outer canthus of eyes, this is known as krimigranthi. Commonly people may experience a dandruff problem with eyebrows and eyelashes. Ayurveda is having certain medications to solve this issue.

There are certain eye conditions that are responsible for dandruff on eyelids and eyelashes. In majority of the cases the person who is suffering from this condition is normally having scalp dandruff and they are worried about it as it looks bad when the flakes fall on their shoulders and clothes. It is a frustrating issue. Don’t worry we will discuss some home remedies that will make you free from this disgraceful condition.

Almond Oil: Due to its moisturizing property it can remove the flakes from skin, sooth the area around the eyes. It nourishes the hair follicles and also prevents hair fall. How to use: take a tablespoon of almond oil and heat it. Apply it on your eyelids and eyelashes.
Olive Oil: Again having the soothing moisturizing property nourishes the skin and soothes eyes. Steps to use: take a tablespoon of olive oil, apply over the affected area, take a soothing cloth, dip it in warm water and place it over your eyes for 5-10 minutes.
Salt: It’s quite shocking to know that using salt is beneficial around the eyes but it is quite beneficial to use it. It improves the clogged pores and absorbs the excessive oil which causes the buildup of dandruff as clogged pores produce dryness so by absorbing oil it opens the clogged pores and provides proper nourishment to the eyes. Directions to use: add 1 tablespoon of salt in 1/4th cup of water. Close your eyes and apply it gently, massage and rinse it with cold water.
Warm Compress: with the dandruff people may also complain of redness, swelling, itching. This problem has a simple solution, warm compression. What you need to do: soak the cloth in warm water and put it over your eyes for 15 minutes. Clothes become cool after sometime soak it again when needed.
Aloe Vera Gel: It helps in expelling bacteria and any other infectious agent from the skin and soothes the redness and itching. It stimulates hair growth and prevents hair fall. Directions to use: take aloe Vera gel, put it over a cotton ball, apply it over your eyes and leave it for 5 minutes, rinse it off with lukewarm water.
Lemon Juice: It contains citric acid that is a very good antimicrobial agent. It helps in getting rid of various infectious causes. Applying method: take a tablespoon of lemon juice, put it in 1/4th cup of water, apply it over your closed eyes for 5 minutes then rinse it with cold water. Follow this home remedy twice a day.
Neem Leaves: It has antimicrobial properties that treat a number of skin conditions. It flakes off the dead skin cells and prevent relapse of dandruff. Method of application: take 10-12 leaves of Neem and take 1 tablespoon of water mix both well and make a paste with the help of pestle and mortar. Apply it over your eyes, leave it for 15 minutes and rinse it with Lukewarm water.
Treatment as per Ayurveda
Let us take a view on ayurvedic treatment of blepharitis. According to ayurveda it is cured by surgical procedure.

Sudation Therapy – Reducing sweat
Bhedana Karma – Incision
Pratisaarana – Local application of triphala, honey and salt.
All these three steps are performed for surgical procedure.

Other consideration for the treatment purpose is ahaara (diet) and vihaara (lifestyle changes)
Ahaara (diet) – Ghee, honey, milk, rock salt, wheat, carrots, green vegetables, tiphala, etc.
Vihaara(lifestyle changes) – Maintain personal hygiene, massage soles of feet with olive oil or any other moisturizing oil, wake up early in the morning and walk regularly on grass. It will improve eye health.
Conclusion
This study gives the introductory knowledge of blepharitis, eye disease. Dandruff is a very common condition among the whole generation. We discuss in this article about the causes of dandruff and the special home remedies to prevent dandruff on eyelashes and eyebrows. Ayurveda mentions these diseases as krimigranthi and also gives its surgical treatment in samhitaas. Have some tips from home remedies and get over this frustrating condition of dandruff.



92. HOME REMEDIES FOR PREMATURE GRAYING OF HAIR
Premature Graying of Hair

Today’s youth are very much concerned about the premature greying of hair. This happens mainly because of the lack of melanin pigment in the hair. This pigment imparts the natural color to the hair. Also, nutritional deficiencies, hormonal disturbances, pollution, smoking, some diseases like sinusitis, thyroid problems, cold, jaundice and stress lead to premature graying of hair. Genetics also plays a crucial role in premature hair graying as well.

Instead of using chemicals to make colorful strands, people generally prefer home remedies to treat the situation.

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES FOR PREMATURE GRAYING OF HAIR
The major home remedies, which play a crucial role in treating premature graying of hair are given below:
1. AMLA
Amla or Indian gooseberry is rich in Vitamin C.
It has anti-oxidants and anti-ageing properties.
Mix one tbsp of amla pulp and lemon juice.
Apply the mixture on the scalp.
Massage it gently at night.
Wash it off in the next morning.
This is a superb remedy, which prevents premature graying of hair to a huge extent.
2. HENNA
Henna is a natural hair coloring agent.
It strengthens the hair and imparts a lustrous shine to the hair.
It also makes the color of the hair darker.
Take some henna leaves and boil in coconut oil until the leaves turn charred.
Apply this oil on the hair.
This is highly effective.
3. CURRY LEAVES
These leaves darken the pigmentation in the hair.
These act as the wonderful tonic for maintaining the health of the hairs.
Take some fresh curry leaves and boil in coconut oil until becomes charred.
Strain the oil. And massage it in the hair.
Then, keep for approximately 30 minutes. Then, wash it off. Carry out this process once weekly.
4. ONION JUICE
Recent studies have shown that accumulation of hydrogen peroxide on the base of the hair follicles lead to premature graying of hair.
Onion juice is a superb home remedy for treating thinning hairs and early graying.
Apply some amount of onion juice to the scalp.
Massage it gently and leave for 30 minutes.
Then wash it off. Repeat this process daily, weekly.
Follow the above home remedies and try to stay happy and avoid stress and tension in life. You will enjoy healthy and beautiful hair !!




93. Home Remedies for Psoriasis
psoriasis

Skin diseases are one among most common health problems worldwide which has profound influence on patient’s lives and these are associated with considerable trouble. Skin disease like Psoriasis is associated with physical discomfort and impairment of patient’s quality of life.

As it runs in families so we can say that somewhere genes are also responsible for this. On the other hand it can also take place when defense mechanism overreacts leads to flaking and inflammation of the skin. As Psoriasis is a long lasting chronic disease but can be managed successfully with effective home remedies.

Signs and Symptoms of the Psoriasis
Psoriasis patches can vary in size and location as well.

Dry and cracked skin
Red, inflamed patches on the skin
Itching and burning sensation of the skin especially when it is under the breasts or buttocks.
Small areas of bleeding when skin scales are scraped off.
Swollen and stiff painful joints
Thick, pitted or discolored ridged nails
Similar plaques in the same area on both sides of the body like both knees and both elbows.
Effective Home Remedies –
1. Aloe Vera
Gel from the aloe plant (which is related to the cactus) can be applied to the skin up to three times a day. Some research shows it can help reduce redness and scaling associated with psoriasis.

2. Turmeric
Turmeric or what we call haldi in hindi is being frequently studied for its powerful anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. Curcumin, the active ingredient in turmeric also has the ability to alter gene expression. You can apply a layer of paste prepared with haldi and water.

3. Neem
Neem is known for its antibacterial properties along with many health benefits. Leaves of neem can be squeezed to make juice for application.

4. Oats
Application of oats paste can also alleviate dryness and redness of the skin.

5. Salted Water
Water when mixed with sea salt can be used for bath as it cleans the pors and detoxifies the body. Care has to be taken if open wounds or injuries are there as salt can causes burning sensation.

Tips
Take bath daily but take care that frequent bathing can increase the dryness of skin. Use lukewarm water instead of hot water and just pat the skin to make it dry rather than using towels.
Avoid much exposure under sunlight because sunburns can worsen the symptoms.
Avoid alcohol and smoking
Stick to fruit juices and balanced diet only.
Avoid very spicy, hot and sour food items.




94. Home Remedies for Pneumonia
Pneumonia

Pneumonia is a complication, which involves the respiratory system. It leads to inflammation of the lungs. At times, the microorganisms get hold of the body’s immune system and attack it. Children and aged adults are more prone to this respiratory disorder. It is characterized by fever, cough, shivering, breath shortness, nausea, headache, loss of appetite, muscular pain, vomiting, sweating, fatigue and chest pain as well. People with weak immune system are also vulnerable to pneumonia.

Though there are certain medicines for the treatment of pneumonia. But, people generally prefer the home remedies.

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES FOR PNEUMONIA
1. GARLIC
Garlic has the ability to fight away bacteria, fungi and viruses easily. It contains anti-microbial properties. It helps to lower the temperature of the body and clears the phlegm from the lungs and the chest. Rub a paste of garlic or garlic juice on the chest. You will experience relief from the symptoms of pneumonia.

2. CAYENNE PEPPER
Cayenne pepper contains capsaicin and has beta-carotene. It provides a stimulating action, which releases mucous from respiratory pathway. This clears off the mucous and helps in developing the mucus membrane. Add some lemon juice and cayenne pepper to a glass of water. Drink it for a few times on a daily basis.

3. FENUGREEK SEEDS
Fenugreek has the ability to clear off the congestion since it possesses mucolytic properties. It helps to reduce fever and expel out toxic substances from the body. It also gives rise to sweating. It is a superb remedy for treating pneumonia. Prepare a fenugreek tea. Drink it for a few times regularly.

4. FRESH VEGETABLE JUICE
Fresh vegetables juices like that of carrot, spinach, cucumber or beet are very effective for treating pneumonia and its various symptoms. They enhance the immune system, dissolve the mucous and help in detoxifying the body. They are rich in essential minerals, which are highly useful for the respiratory system of the body. Make a juice using the above vegetables. Drink the juice on a daily basis.

These home remedies are very effective in treating the chronic respiratory disorder – pneumonia. These also provide relief from the various symptoms and pain. These help to alleviate the disorder form its roots.



95. Home Remedies for Premenstrual Syndrome
Premenstrual Syndrome

Pre-menstrual syndrome is a medical complication. A lot of physiological and psychological symptoms occur during this phase. The phase is generally referred to as the 3rd to the 14th day before bleeding occurs. Though, these are temporary, they are extremely dangerous and create a lot of discomfort and pain. The symptoms are tender breasts, abdominal pain, cramps, headache, insomnia, loss of energy, tiredness, fatigue and some more. This has a tremendous effect on the daily living of the individuals. The major cause of this condition is the abnormality in the endocrine system of the individuals.

Important Home Remedies for Premenstrual Syndrome
This discomfort can be treated with various home remedies. These home remedies are extremely effective and helpful.

1. Increase the intake of foods rich in carbohydrates
Fresh vegetables and fruits, breads and whole grains help to reduce the cravings for food. Also, these help in enhancing the mood and reduce the mood swing. These help to get rid of tension, anxiety, depression and stress. Thus, increase the intake of the carbohydrates during this phase. This will provide tremendous relief.

2. Reduce the intake of fat rich food items and increase the protein consumption.
Too much fat leads to mal functioning of the liver. So, limit the regular consumption of fat to 20 percent of calories daily. Instead, increase the consumption of proteins during this phase. Small amount of sea food, lean meat, seeds, fishes, nuts are recommended during this phase.

3. Chamomile Tea or Cinnamon tea
The herbal teas have a lot of anti-oxidants, anti-microbial characteristics. Regular consumption of the herbal teas helps to get away with the symptoms of menstruation every month. Daily consume a cup of these herbal teas right in the morning in empty stomach. You can experience the benefits very well.

4. Avocadoes
Avocadoes have a lot of serotonin. This helps in maintaining the mood of the individuals and prevents anxiety, sadness and depression. Also, papayas, eggplants, plantains and other sources, which are rich in serotonin are extremely effective to treat the condition of premenstrual syndrome.

Besides these home remedies, carry out physical exercises regularly, grab adequate sleep and manage stress. These will help in getting rid of the physical discomfort and pain to a huge extent.



96. Home Remedies for Pyelonephritis (Kidney Infection)
Pyelonephritis

Pyelonephritis is usually an infection caused due to bacteria. This is basically the infection related to the kidneys. The entire excretory system gets affected due to this situation. Blockage in urinary tract, weak immune system, complex disorders like diabetes, AIDS, renal infections and using catheter for a prolonged period of time are the major causes of Pyelonephritis. Nausea, abdominal cramps, fever, vomiting, burning feeling are some of the common symptoms of this infection.

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES FOR PYELONEPHRITIS
These home remedies are very common and extremely beneficial.

1. PARSLEY
Parsley has detoxifying prvoperties. This helps to flush out the toxic materials from the body and get rid of the infections effectively.

 Crust 1 tsp of parsley leaves.
Add the crushed leaves to 1 cup of warm water.
Steep for a few minutes.
Cool the solution.
Strain it.
Add some honey to the solution.
Consume the solution two times on a daily basis.
Repeat the process for some weeks to get benefitted.
2. GARLIC
Garlic has important antibiotic properties. These help to clean the excretory system of the body and remove the infection right from the roots.

Take 3 cloves of garlic.
Consume them raw in empty stomach daily.
Repeat the process for a few weeks.
3. YOGURT
Yogurt has anti-oxidating properties. It prevents the bacteria from affecting the internal lining of the urinary tract. It also enhances the functioning of the immune system.

Take 2 cups of yogurt.
Add fiber rich fruits to the yogurt.
Consume it daily for some weeks.
4. CRANBERRY JUICE
According to studies, this juice treats the urinary infections and also stops the recurrence of the infections to a huge extent. Cranberry juice has a lot of potential to fight off the bacterial infection easily.

Take 1 liter of unsweetened form of cranberry juice.
Drink it daily.
It is recommended not to drink more than 1 liter of cranberry juice in a day since it has other side effects.
These home remedies are extremely helpful and effective to treat Pyelonephritis !!



97. Home Remedies for Rheumatism (Rheumatic Diseases)
Rheumatism

Introduction
Healthy diet is the key source to maintain the overall health of the body. We can take essential nutrient from the fruits, vegetables as well as from other foods. Sometimes, it is not possible for us to take every essential nutrient in a right amount. And for such condition, home remedies are here. The main role of home remedies are to support a healthy diet.

Home Remedies
1. Potato Juice:
The juice of raw potato is regarded as an excellent remedy for rheumatism. One or two teaspoons of the juice, taken out by pressing mashed raw potatoes, should be taken before meals. This will help to eliminate the toxic condition and relieve rheumatism. The skin of the potato is also an excellent remedy for rheumatism. The skin is exceptionally rich in vital mineral salts, and the water in which the peelings are boiled is one of the best medicines for ailments caused by excess toxic matter in the system. Approximately thirty grams of the potato peelings should be thoroughly washed and boiled in half a litre of water till it is reduced to half. The decoction should then be strained and a glass of the same should be taken three or four times daily.

2. Bitter Gourd:
Bitter gourd is considered beneficial in the treatment of rheumatism. A cup of juice, extracted from the vegetable, should be mixed with a teaspoon of honey, and taken daily for treating this condition. This treatment should be continued for at least three months to provide relief.

3. Celery:
Celery is another effective remedy for rheumatism. A fluid extract of the seeds is more powerful than the raw vegetable. This also has a tonic action on the stomach and kidneys. Five to ten drops of this fluid should be taken in hot water before meals. Powdered seeds can be used as a condiment.

4. Lemon:
Lemons are beneficial in the treatment of rheumatism. The patient should take the juice of two or three lemons each day. This will bring good results.

5. Walnuts:
Walnuts are valuable in rheumatism. They should, however, be thoroughly masticated to achieve beneficial results. Half a dozen can be taken daily in the treatment of this condition.

6. Rhubarb:
The herb rhubarb has been found valuable in rheumatism. The green stalks of this herb should be pounded with an equal quantity of sugar. A teaspoonful should be taken three or four times a day. This remedy seldom fails.

Dietary Considerations
In the case of acute rheumatism, the patient should be put on a short fast of orange juice and water for three or four days. After the juice fast, the patient should be placed on a restricted diet for fourteen days. In this regimen, orange or grapefruit may be taken for breakfast; lunch may consist of raw salad of seasonal vegetables with raisins, prunes, figs, or dates; and dinner may comprise of one or two steamed vegetables. Thereafter, the patient may gradually adopt a well-balanced diet consisting of seeds, nuts, grains, vegetables, and fruits. In case of chronic rheumatism, the patient may be placed on an all-fruit diet for four or five days. He may, thereafter, gradually adopt a well-balanced diet. The patient should take ripe fruits, fresh vegetables, and buttermilk in abundance. He should avoid all meat and fish; white bread, sugar, and refined cereals; rich, indigestible and highly-seasoned foods; tea and coffee; alcohol; sauces, pickles, and condiments.

Other Measures
In the case of acute rheumatism, the bowels should be cleansed daily with a warm-water enema during the first three or four days of the juice fast. Other helpful methods in the treatment of rheumatism are application of heat and hot packs to the affected parts, a hot tub bath, a cabinet steam bath, dry friction, and a sponge bath. Hot Epsom salts baths are also beneficial and should be taken twice a week for three months in case of chronic rheumatism and once weekly thereafter. The affected parts should also be bathed t\vice daily in hot water containing Epsom salts, after which some olive oil should be applied. Fresh] air, deep breathing, and light outdoor exercises are also beneficial. Dampness and cold should be avoided.



98. Home Remedies for Ringworm
Ringworm

Ringworm is scientifically known as ‘Dermatophytosis’. Ringworm means fungal infections on various areas of the skin. The infection gets transmitted through the pets. These infections are mostly common among children. However, any individual can get affected by ringworm.

The major causes of Ringworm include maintaining unhygienic condition, through the pets, cuts or scratches in the various parts of the skin, sweating is common and some others.

Ringworm gives rise to scaly rash, red patches, scaling on scalp, lesions in the form of blisters, and itching

Useful Home Remedies
1. Papaya
Papaya contains enzymes, which effectively help to kill the microorganism, fungi causing the condition of ringworm. Rub a freshly cut slice of the raw papaya on the infected area. It is yet an effective home remedy for ringworm.

2. Mustard Seeds
Grind the mustard seeds in the powdered form. Add some water to the seeds and make a paste. Apply the paste on the infected areas till the infection vanishes. This works as a wonderful home remedy for treating ringworm.

3. Tulsi
The juice prepared from the Tulsi leaves has a lot of medicinal properties. It has anti-fungal, anti-bacterial, anti-viral properties. The juice is applied on the infected area for 2 to 3 times on a daily basis helps to fight away the infection distinctly.

4. Garlic
Garlic has anti-fungal characteristic. This helps to treat innumerable health complications, including the ringworm. Smash some garlic pieces and rub on the infected area daily. The patches will heal and disappear.

5. Turmeric
Turmeric possesses antibiotic characteristics. Get the juice extracted from the fresh turmeric. Apply the juice on the infected area daily till the infection disappears. Turmeric is a superb home remedy for ringworm

6. Lavender Oil
Lavender oil has tremendous anti-fungal characteristics. Application of this oil on the infected parts prevents the fungi from spreading further. It kills the infection completely and thus, is a superb home remedy for ringworm.

7. Salt and Vinegar
The combination of salt and vinegar is highly effective in treating ringworm. Prepare a paste of vinegar and salt. Apply on the affected areas and keep it for 5 minutes. Repeat this on a daily basis till the infection gets cured completely.

Follow the above home remedies and get the fungal infection cured in just a few days!!



99. Home Remedies For Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis
Introduction
There are some diseases which can not be seen but the suffering is suffocating and increases with each passing day. Have you ever thought of being sick everyday along with pain? Not able to breath properly or comfortably along with continued chest pains, kind of burning in limbs, fevers at night, sometimes all day fevers. Complimentary, you get difficulty while eating. Feeling of being choked along with your organs being slowly rotten away. Well a person with sarcoidosis lives with this and more everyday.

Sarcoidosis is a condition which is capable of affecting any organ or any system of your body. The classic feature of this condition is the formation of granulomas, microscopic clumps of inflammatory cells which group together to form a look like granules in this case. When the clumps get too many in number then they hamper the functioning of a particular organ or system.

Causes of Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis is a condition which is due to the autoimmune process going on inside the body. Autoimmune process means heightened immunity, which results in the destruction or damage of the body’s own healthy cells by the immune system. This is when the immune system confuses the toxins with normal working cells due to their similar appearance.

If understood in Ayurveda, then the condition is the result of accumulated ama dosha in the body. As there is accumulated am in the body, it results in the blockage of micro channels. These blocked microchannels describe the overgrowth, called granuloma in this case. As there is mostly the involvement of the respiratory system in this case then there is a possibility of prana vaha srotas dushti and prana vayu avrodh in sarcoidosis.

Now coming to the most important part of this content is the “Home Remedies”.

Home Remedies For Sarcoidosis
In case of sarcoidosis, there are many things which can be done when there is aggravation of symptoms. The symptoms in this case are shortness of breath due to excessive mucus production in the respiratory tract, pain in chest, persistent cough, wheezing and many others. There is a possibility that oxygen saturation falls down in many cases. In rare cases other organs are primarily involved but in 90% of the cases lungs are the primary site. So, we are mentioning home remedies for quick relief at home in sarcoidosis.

Infusions 1 – A quick infusion of ginger and tulsi: Take sonth (Dry ginger) and two to three fresh leaves of tulsi. Add it in one and a half cup of water and boil for 3-4 minutes. Once it’s boiled, pour and drink.
Infusion 2 – Infusion of hot water and saindhav namak (Pink salt): Take 100-200 ml of water and bring it to warm. Add pink salt one tsp into it. Now let it cool down a bit and then do gargles in case of excessive mucus production.
Infusion 3 – Spark of Cinnamon:
Take two cups of water and add 3-4 inches of coarse cinnamon powder to it. Bring it to a boil and then pour. Cool down a bit and drink.it helps in relieving congestion.
Infusion 4 – Mixture of Herbs: For shortness of breath make a decoction of black pepper, sonth, Saidhav lavan and gud. Take 2-3 black pepper, one fourth tsp of sonth, half tsp of saindhav lavan and 50gms of gud. Take it twice a day.
Do’s and Don’ts
Do’s and Don’ts in Diet
Stop intake of dairy products – As it causes srotas blockage.
Have warm water on regular basis – As it relieves excessive mucus production.
Avoid meat and meat products – As they cause accumulation of ama.
Abstinence from citrus fruits – Because they aggravate symptoms.
Have soups of various vegetables – Provides soothing effect.
Have food that is easily digestible – Reduces chances for symptom aggravation.
No alcohol – As it can cause sudden aggravation.
Do’s and Don’ts in Lifestyle
Try to sleep early at night – Its important
Avoid exposure of cold air – As it aggravate symptoms like mucus production and chest pain
Keep yourself warm in winters – Its required
Take care of your digestion – Don’t avoid any unusual imbalance in your diet.
Exercise regularly – Patients of sarcoidosis must perform breathing exercises like pranayam called bhambhri and anulom vilom. This provides better breathing and improves inhalation and exhalation capacity.




100. Home Remedies for Scurvy
Scurvy

Scurvy is a nutritional deficiency disorder. It is caused due to the lack of Vitamin C in the body. The major symptoms of this disease are swelling in the gums, bleeding, weak cardiac system, hemorrhages and the circulatory system of the body also gets affected. The major causes of scurvy are allergy to Vitamin C, restriction to diet and anorexia. This disease was previously known as the Sailor’s disease.

The scurvy and its symptoms can be easily cured with the help of the various home remedies.

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES FOR SCURVY
There are some effective home remedies, which provide perfect relief from the bleeding and other problems related to scurvy.

1. LEMON JUICE
The lemon juice has ascorbic acid.
It is rich in Vitamin C.
Mix one entire lemon juice in lukewarm water.
Add some honey to it.
Drink the solution two times on a daily basis.
The symptoms will disappear eventually over a period of time.
2. GOOSEBERRY/AMLAKI
Grind the dried gooseberries.
Mix the powder with sugar.
Consume the mixture two times daily.
Also, the mixture can be dissolved in water.
And, you can consume the solution as well.
Also, the mixture can be added to warm milk.
And drink the mixture before going to bed.
These help to get rid of the symptoms of scurvy effectively.
3. POTATOES
Mashed potatoes are also excellent home remedies to alleviate scurvy.
Boil a certain amount of potatoes and consume the mashed potatoes.
Also, prepare some gravy using the tomatoes.
Tomato is also rich in Vitamin C.
Consume the tomato soup with the mashed potato.
This serves to be a superb home remedy for treating scurvy.
4. ORANGES
Oranges are also very rich in Vitamin C.
It is recommended to consume a lot of oranges in the juice form or simply as the fruit to get rid of scurvy.
5. GREEN LEAFY VEGETABLES
These are also the important source of Vitamin C.
These include tomatoes, sweet lemon, cantaloupes, grapefruit, tomatoes and kiwifruit.
Also, Brussels, broccoli, sprouts, green peppers and cabbage are some of the other wonderful vegetables, which are extremely rich in Vitamin C.
Consuming these vegetables to get rid of scurvy.



101. How to Cure Skin Problems Naturally ?
Skin Problems

Skin is the most sensitive part of our body which is exposed to the external environment, It could be the reason behind various skin problems. The Skin problems such as psoriasis, allergies, bacterial infections, fungal infection, acne, eczema, and insect bites, all these skin disorders can be easily treated by using home remedies. The skin allergies and diseases leads to rashes, irritation, itching, and redness on your skin. This could be visible on any parts of your body. Home remedies are the best solution for all kind of skin problems, they are free from any side effects and will make your skin glowing and healthy. Today most of the people are affected with a common skin disorder i.e. acne. It mainly effects your physical visibility. Lets discuss some home remedies which are really effective for skin problems.

Home Remedies for Skin Problems
1. Aloe Vera
It is a very powerful anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, antibacterial, anti-fungal herb which treats chronic problems like acne, dry skin, psoriasis, and sunburn etc. Aloe vera has a good anti-aging property which helps to remove the fine lines from our skin. It keeps your skin smooth and soft. Aloe Vera gives a cooling effect to your skin. This herb contains two hormones auxin and gibberellins which provide anti-inflammatory property to it and protect our skin from swelling. The leaves of aloe vera contain phytochemicals such as anthraquinones, acetylated mannans, hormones, amino acid, carbohydrates, fatty acids, and enzymes, which are helpful for clear acne free skin.

Take the stem of aloe vera, remove the uppermost layer and apply the jelly portion on your skin directly.
Repeat this 3-times in a day.
You can also mix the aloe vera gel with coconut oil, with the help of cotton pad apply it gently on your skin.
2. Neem (Azadirachta Indica)
Neem has been used for several years for the treatment of various skin problems including acne, rashes, psoriasis, and various fungal infections. Its roots, bark, leaves, flowers, and seeds all have medicinal properties. According to the Ayurvedic point of view, neem is bitter, astringent in taste, dry and light to digest and cold in potency. Azadirachta indica helps to heal wounds quickly and also provide relieves from diabetic carbuncles.

Boil some neem leaves, strain the solution, leave it for 10 mints and allow it to cool down.
Drink this solution in the morning with empty stomach.
You can also apply the neem extract paste on your face for 10-15 mints and then rise your face with lukewarm water.
3. Turmeric (Curcuma Longa)
Turmeric is one of famous Ayurvedic herb and has various medicinal properties. Its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant property protect our skin from inflammation and oxidative damage by ROS species. This herb mainly calms your skin and target your pores. Turmeric can also help your face to clear up from acne breakouts. Medicinal properties of turmeric: Bitter, pungent in taste, dryness, and lightness in qualities, and hot in potency. After digestion, this herb undergoes pungent taste. It balances all the three doshas of our body.

Take 1-2 tablespoons of turmeric powder and add some rose water to it. Make a smooth paste and apply this on your skin.
Leave it for 10-20 minutes, and wash your face with lukewarm water.
You can also take it as dietary supplements.
4. Coconut Oil
Coconut oil is the natural and most beneficial dietary substance due to its medicinal properties. It acts as a natural anti-fungal and antibacterial agent. Due to its anti-inflammatory properties, it is amazing for the people who suffer from Psoriasis. It keeps your skin moisturized for a long time. This helps us to stop the damage to the tissue in the body due to oxidation.

Consume one tablespoon of coconut oil daily.
Take a cotton ball and dip it into coconut oil, apply gently on your skin and let it become absorbed.
5. Apple Cider Vinegar
Raw and organic apple cider vinegar is a common home remedy to treat skin irritation, rashes, and inflammation. Due to its acetic nature, it is very helpful for skin infections such as various allergies that could cause serious problems. Along with all skin problems, apple cider vinegar also prevents our body from diabetes, obesity, heart disorders, and cholesterol problem. The protective acidic layer of apple cider vinegar make your skin smoother and it absorbs the excess oil from your skin. It restoring the proper pH level to your skin and protect your skin from future damage.

Add 1-2 tablespoons of apple cider vinegar in one glass of lukewarm water.
Mix it well and drink it in the early morning before your breakfast.
Dip a cotton ball in diluted ACV and apply it gently on your affected area of skin. Do this twice daily.
6. Lavender Essential Oil
Lavender essential oil is very beneficial for any type of fungal infection on the surface of your skin. The fungal infection may lead to intense itching and discomfort. It mainly affects the moist and warm area of your skin. Due to its strong antifungal, and anti-inflammatory nature this oil helps to reduce the skin inflammation and fight against fungal infection. It also has antiseptic, analgesic, hypotensive and sedative effects.

Mix 2-3 tablespoons of this oil with one tablespoon of coconut oil.
Dip a cotton ball in this solution and apply the oil blend on the infected area of your skin.
Leave it for 25-30 minutes, rinse it with lukewarm water and pat dry thoroughly.
Do this twice daily for few months until the fungal infection is completely gone.
7. Oat Meal
The use of oatmeal is not limited to your morning breakfast, you can also include oatmeal in your beauty regimen to cure various skin problems. Oatmeal contain 18 different amino acids, which are very essential for our skin. Amino acids help our body to build tissue and promote healing. Oatmeal is the rich source of vitamin B, Thiamin, copper, zinc, and selenium and omega-3 fatty acids which support the good health of your skin. The oatmeal face mask is beneficial for people who are suffering from acne problems. It exfoliates dead skin and helps to maintain the pH level of the skin.

Add one tablespoon of honey, ½ tablespoon of lemon in one tablespoon of oatmeal. Mix it well.
Apply this paste on your face gently in circular motion.
Leave it for 10-20 minutes.
After that rinse your face with lukewarm water.
Apply this face mask once or twice a week.
All these natural remedies which are mention above are very helpful to cure various skin problems. You should try these remedies at home. Along with these, you can also opt for peppermint essential oil, lemon juice, and gram flour powder.




102. Home Remedies for Stomach ache

Stomach ache is also known as abdominal pain or Abdominal cramps. The causes of the stomach ache can be many. It may be due to the irritable bowel syndrome, indigestion, gastritis, hernia, stomach ulcers, appendicitis, urinary tract infection, gall bladder stones and many more. The stomach leads to tremendous discomfort and pain.

If the stomach ache persists for more than a few days, it is essential to visit a doctor. However, most of the cases, this condition can be treated with useful home remedies.

Home Remedies for Stomach ache
1. Chamomile Tea
Chamomile tea is an herbal tea, which helps to ease the pain in the stomach. The herb has anti-inflammatory characteristic, which smoothens the muscular contractions of the digestive tracts. When the muscles relax, the food gets pushed up through the system easily easing out the pain.

2. Rice Water
Rice water acts as the demulcent. It provides relief from the inflammation. It forms a barrier over the membrane, thereby imparting a soothing impact to the painful condition.

3. Warm Lemon Water
If the stomach ache is due to indigestion, warm lemon water is highly effective. The increased level of acidity will stimulate the hydrochloric acid production. This will help to metabolise the food particles helping to smoothen the process of digestion. The system gets flushed out of the toxins and thus, runs at a smoother pace.

4. Ginger Tea
Ginger possesses shogaols and gingerols. These chemicals relax the muscles of the intestinal tract. This provides relief from the stomach cramps and aches. It also provides relief from nausea and other digestion related complications.

5. Fennel Seeds
Fennel seeds have anethole. This stimulates the secretion of the various digestive juices. This reduces inflammation and the pain. This provides tremendous relief from stomach inflammation and gastritis as well and relieves the discomforts easily.

6. Baking Soda
Baking soda decreases the excess hydrochloric acid present in the stomach. This helps to maintain the pH level providing a neutralizing impact on the acid. This provides tremendous relief from the condition of stomach ache.

Thus, these are some of the home remedies for stomach ache. Besides, it is mandatory to maintain proper hygiene to get rid of the painful symptoms of this condition.



103. Home Remedies For Stress & Anxiety
Stress & Anxiety
Introduction
Stress and anxiety are the issues which are interconnected to each other from a very long time. Stress which can be in physical form or mental form will obviously affect the individual harshly. Thus stress causes deterioration in the mental health and gives birth to anxiety. Anxiety is a condition that is mostly observed by palpitations, recurrent irritating thoughts, feeling nervous, restless with rapid fast breathing. A person may also show symptoms such as sweating and trembling as well. Though people try many ways to cope with stress and anxiety. Some succeed in their efforts, some do not. But the remedies in this article can help successfully in both of the cases.

Causes Of Stress & Anxiety
The causes or triggers of stress and anxiety are mostly very common things like starting a new job, fear from new people, moving to a new place etc. In other cases the anxiety can be the result of sudden loss of a loved one, heart break, recurrent bullying, not doing well in a relationship, marriage, friendship or in a class and many other reasons are also there.

Home Remedies For Stress & Anxiety
There are many remedies which can help in anxiety situations but the most effective ones are as following:

Teas
Having teas prepared with some nervine herbs is really effective. Herbs like lavender and chamomile can help in this case really well.

Chamomile Tea: Chamomile tea is prepared with the chamomile flower. The water is boiled in a small pan and then a chamomile flower is added (Dried petals or fresh petals). Let it infuse and pour the tea into a small cup. Drink a little dried ginger can be added to it as well.
Lavender Tea: Lavender tea is prepared with the flower buds of lavender. The flower buds of lavender are dried and then used. Boil the water in a pan and add a few dried pan in boiling water. Infuse for 2-3 minutes and take off the pan from the stove. Pour the tea into a cup and drink.
Both of the teas can be taken once or twice a day.

These teas help in relaxing the entire nervous system and reduce the recurrent attacks of anxiety by managing the effect of stress on the body.

Brahmi Tea:
This can be prepared with fresh brahmi leaves infused in 50-100 ml of hot water.

Mixtures
Stress and anxiety are something that runs hand in hand. Usually they can not happen without one another. So, some regular Mixtures can also help in this case.

Mixture 1: Take 100 ml of fresh pomegranate juice and mix 3-4 pinch of nutmeg powder in it. Drink it regularly on an empty stomach. Here pomegranate is just a Vehicle of administration, the main thing is nutmeg powder. Nutmeg is quite famous for its effect on drying properties of vata and stagnant properties of kapha.
Mixture 2: A mixture of hot milk and nutmeg powder can also be taken. The quantity of milk should be 100 ml along with 2-3 pinch of nutmeg powder.
Mixture 3: Take half tsp of honey and mix 2-3 pinch of nutmeg powder in it. Have it once a day and the frequency of stress and anxiety will automatically reduce.
Do’s, Don’ts & Lifestyle – Diet Modifications
When a person is having recurrent anxiety attacks or recurrent stress then he or she should observe what is causing or triggering the situation. There are some other things which should be observed by the patient like frequency of attacks, factors contributing for the repeated episodes and what is the duration of an anxiety attack or anxiety related symptoms. The most important one is how the situation is brought into control by the person.

The factors which generally or commonly contribute to the starting of anxiety attacks are smoking or chewing tobacco, drinking alcohol and intake of caffeine.

A person usually feels left alone when such situations appear, so it’s better to talk to people (who you trust) about what should be done and how long you are facing the situation. You might need a good talk or a counselling but anxiety can be managed with simple remedies, strong mindset and certain changes in diet- lifestyle as well.

In diet, avoid milk and milk products, caffeine intake, alcohol consumption and tobacco substances like cigarettes.

In lifestyle, one should start from having a sound sleep as sleep enhances the cortisol balance in the body. A patient should do yoga, exercise or meditate on a regular basis. One should be filling their lives with positive people and positive tasks instead of opting for negative or competitive companies.




104. Home Remedies for Sciatica
Sciatica

Sciatica is a painful disorder, which occurs due to the compression of sciatic nerve. Slipped disc or spinal injuries or pregnancy are the major causes of this disorder. Only one part of the body gets affected. It results in severe pain, especially in the lower back region. Important symptoms are:

Weakness
Numbness
Difficulty in sitting or standing for prolonged period of time
Burning sensation in the affected area
THE TOP HOME REMEDIES TO TREAT THE SITUATION ARE THE FOLLOWING:
1. TURMERIC WITH ASHWAGANDHA
Turmeric has a lot of medicinal properties, which help to cure the severe pain, inflammation and other related disorders effectively.

Take half tsp of each turmeric and ashwagandha powder.
Add it to a cup of milk.
Boil the solution.
Drink this solution for one or two times on a daily basis.
2. GARLIC, GINGER AND ONION
All three things are wonderful in sciatica.
Increase your use of garlic, onion and ginger in all your dishes.
Four raw cloves, 2 raw small pieces of ginger and half of onion each morning can go a long way to fight pain (and also to boost your immune system).
One can make paste also to consume easily.
The use of all three are amazing.
3. POTATO JUICE
Potato is a wonderful home remedy, which provides relief from the sciatic pain.

Squeeze a raw potato to extract its juice.
Mix the raw potato juice with some amount of carrot juice.
Drink the solution two times on a daily basis.
You will surely get benefitted from the pain.

4. COLD AND WARM COMPRESS
Alternate application of cold and warm compress on the affected area provides relief to the tensed nerves and muscles.

Place the cold or the warm pack on the affected part for about 15 minutes
Repeat the process for every 3 to 4 hours and get relief from the terrific pain.
However, people having circulatory problems must avoid this home remedy.

5. CELERY
Celery is another effective home remedy for sciatica. This green vegetable has a lot of nutrients and anti-oxidating and anti-inflammatory properties.

Take a glass of boiling water.
Put the leaves and stems of the celery in it.
Boil the solution in low heat until the solution becomes green.
Drink the solution thrice daily to get relief from the inflammation, pain and irritation.
Try out these home remedies and lead a healthy life !!



105. Home Remedies for Shiny Teeth
Shiny teeth

Shiny teeth make an individual appear attractive and beautiful. Individuals avoid smiling in public since they feel embarrassed about their yellow teeth. They become extremely conscious, which make them lose their self confidence.

The major factors of discoloring of teeth are as follows:
Genetic
Poor hygiene
Ageing
Excessive consumption of coffee and tea
Too much intake of cigarettes and tobacco
Infection
Climatic conditions
Improper metabolic processes of the body
High doses of medicines and antibiotics
There are certain treatments available to get rid of the yellow color of their teeth. However, these treatments may take some amount of time and are expensive as well. There are certain home remedies available, which help to enjoy shiny teeth.

Useful Home Remedies
1. Baking Soda
Brush the teeth with your toothpaste mixed with some amount of baking soda.
This removes the yellowness and plaque considerably, imparting white shiny teeth.
2. Orange Peel
Clean the teeth with orange peel regularly.
This removes the yellow color, which gets accumulated on the teeth.
It also contains calcium and vitamin C, which fights away the organisms.
3. Salt
Salt aids in replenishing the mineral of the teeth, thereby, retaining the whiteness and shine.
It forms a fundamental agent of dental cleaning.
Also, apply salt cautiously since it may damage the enamel of the teeth and gums.
4. Lemon
Lemons possess bleaching action, which helps to alleviate discoloration of the teeth.
It is suggested to gargle with lemon juice and scrub the teeth with the lemon peel.
These help to regain the whiteness of the teeth maintaining the dental hygiene.
Tips
Brush two times for sure
Eat healthy




106. Top 7 Home Remedies for Sleep Disorders
Introduction
Home Remedies
Home Remedies for Sleep Disorder

A good sleep is an important part of our life. Everyone experiences trouble sleeping once in a life. But in some case, people are suffering from a continuous sleep disorder which is normally called as insomnia. It can be due to stress, workload, medicinal effects, illness, pain, and other factors. Some of the most common sleep disorders are:

Insomnia
Narcolepsy
Night terror
Bed Wetting
Sleep apnea
Nocturnal bruxism
Sleep walking
Restless legs syndrome
If you are not able to take proper sleep and facing persistent trouble in sleeping then you should see a doctor to find out the main cause behind it. Sleeping is very essential for overall physical and mental health. If you are not getting your sleep for even a day then it will change your mood and also trouble your overall health. You may feel tired for the whole day and cannot concentrate on your work properly. So if you don’t get the recommended seven hours of sleep each night, there can be serious consequences in the workplace. Along with all the nutrients and proper healthy diet, a good sleep can also help to improve your fitness and health.

Home Remedies for Sleep Disorders
You should make some changes in your daily life that will help you to overcome this problem. We are here provides some natural home remedies for treatment of insomnia and sleep disorder. These home remedies are very effective and help you fall asleep and stay asleep longer.

1. Epsom Salt
Epsom salt is not actually salt but it’s a naturally occurring pure mineral compound which contains magnesium and sulfate in it. Magnesium and sulfide in Epsom salt can be easily absorbed by the body. Its qualities and benefits are quite different from regular salt. According to the Ayurvedic point of view, Epsom salt is salty and slightly sweet in taste, cold in potency and light, unctuous in qualities. Due to its cold potency, its helps to pacify the Pitta dosha, along with this it also balances the Kapha and Vata dosha in our body. Magnesium and sulfate in Epsom salt help to calm the nervous system. To get relief from stress add one cup of Epsom salt in your warm bathtub. Soak your body in a bathtub for about 20-25 minutes. Repeat this 2-3 times a week.

2. Lavender Oil
Lavender oil act as an aromatic scent which provides a calming effect on your body. Lavender oil contains both psychological as well as physiological properties. It has antifungal, antibacterial, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, antidepressant, calmative, antiseptic, antispasmodic and sedative properties. This oil helps you to distract your mind from the situation that can trigger an anxiety attack. So ultimately it reduces the sign and symptom of anxiety and sleep disorder. Put 2-3 drops of oil on your hand and mix it with some drops of olive oil, massage the mixture of oil on your shoulder, back and neck. You can also rub it on your temple and on the bottom of each foot before going to bed.

3. Warm Milk
Drinking a glass of warm milk before your bedtime helps you to enjoy sound sleep. Milk is a rich source of calcium which helps to regulate the melatonin production in your body. Melatonin plays a very crucial role in sleep disorder. It is basically a hormone which is made by the pineal gland. So you should take one glass of warm milk and add a half teaspoon of cinnamon powder, and little honey to it. Drink it before one hour of your sleep.

4. Bananas
Bananas shows the a very good effect on sleep disorder. It helps to increase the serotonin level in your body. The main factor behind the increased production of serotonin is tryptophan. It’s an amino acid which increases the automatically raise the level of serotonin in your body and regulate the sleep pattern in your body. Along with this property, bananas are also a very good source of magnesium and potassium that helps to promote sleep. Add one banana daily in your diet, one hour before your bedtime. You can also make banana shake by adding milk to it.

5. Chamomile
This is one of best herb which has the ability to soothe an anxious kapha mind. Due to its aromatic property, it relaxes and refreshes your nervous system. Ayurveda believes that all disease begins in the digestive tract so your food should be healthy and fresh. Chamomile aromatic taste helps to dry up the mucus in the gastrointestinal tract and promote the proper digestion in your stomach and provide relief from stomach disturbance which is also one of the reasons for a sleep disorder. A warm cup of chamomile tea one hour before your bedtime will help to relax your mind and nerves. To make a cup of chamomile tea, mix 3 teaspoons of dried chamomile in one cup of warm water. Strain it and add one teaspoon of honey and pinch of cinnamon powder to it. Mix them well and drink it daily for better sleep.

6. Valerian Root
Valerian can also help to promote better sleep and relax your mind. It is famous due to its anxiolytic, sedative and anticonvulsant properties. These properties of Valerian root helps to induce relaxation and deep sleep. It is used to cure problems such as anxiety, sleep disorder, menopausal symptoms, headache, and high blood pressure. Add one tablespoon of valerian root powder in one cup of hot water. Leave it for 15 minutes, strain and add some honey to it. Drink it before your bedtime.

7. Coconut Oil
This is one of most common home remedy for a sleep disorder. According to naturopathic practitioners, massaging your body with coconut oil can help you to sleep better and it also relaxes your body. Take some warm coconut oil in your hand and rub the oil gently on your neck, shoulder, bottom of feet and on back. Massage this oil in a circular motion this will definitely provide relief to your nerves and muscles.



107. Home Remedies for Sunburn
Sunburn

If you are overexposed to the sun, it is likely that you will develop the sunburns. Redness, rashes, patches, skin irritations are the consequences of sunburns. The epidermis becomes inflammatory due to the exposure to the ultraviolet rays of the sun. These burns are generally temporary. However, if not treated at home and with proper care, these burns can be permanent.

Useful Home Remedies
1. Cider Vinegar
Add a cup of cider vinegar your bath. This will help in skin healing and maintaining a balance of the pH level of the burned skin.

2. Aloe Vera Lotion
Apply lotions, which have aloe vera in them. These provide a moisturizing and soothing action to the skin. Also, the aloe products have an anesthetic agent, lidocaine. This helps to provide relief from the pain of the sunburn.

3. Cool Milk
Pour cool, but not cold, milk in a clean cloth to the burned skin, The milk creates a film of protein that eases the discomfort and the pain created by the sunburns. This is a superb home remedy for sunburns.

4. Cucumbers
These have natural analgesic and antioxidating characteristics. Chill the cucumbers, make a paste and apply to the affected parts of the sun burns. Cucumbers form an excellent home remedy for sunburns.

5. Freshly Brewed Tea
Put the freshly brewed cooled tea to the skin in a clean piece of cloth. The tannic acid present in the tea helps to take away the heat from the skin and restores the pH balance of the skin. This forms an effective remedy for treating the sunburns.

6. Oatmeal Bath
Soak the infected areas in the oatmeal bath. This provides relief from the itchiness and pain due to sunburns of the affected regions.

Tips
The best tip is not to get over exposed to the sun rays.
Prevention is better than cure.
Put cold compress or cold water for about 15 minutes on the sunburned areas.
 Apply sun blocking lotion or sunscreen creams before getting exposed to the sun rays.
These are the home-made remedies to get rid of the sun burns. Apply them and get cured in a period of time.



108. How to Cure Scleroderma with Home Remedies?
Scleroderma

Scleroderma is the medical term used for the disease which causes hardening and thickening of skin connective tissues. Many patients with Scleroderma feel uncomfortable and over-self-conscious. This disease shows symptoms such as dry, stiff and itchy skin, red spots on hands and face, dry mouth, and fatigue. It’s an autoimmune disease due to which the symptoms vary from person to person. There are a number of drugs such as Penicillamine, and glucocorticoids that are used to treat Scleroderma, but these don’t show high degree of efficacy, and also harm the skin in the long run. Instead of using harmful drugs it’s better to opt for some Ayurvedic home remedies. There are a number of herbs, foods, and spices that show great effects and results in Scleroderma. All the home remedies are natural and very efficacious and will give the desired positive results in a few months without any adverse effects.

Home Remedies for Scleroderma
For Local Application
1. Turmeric
This herb has been used for many years in Ayurveda due to its great Ayurvedic properties. According to Ayurveda, Turmeric is Bitter in taste, dryness, and lightness are its qualities, after digestion it undergoes pungent taste and is hot in potency. Turmeric balances the Kapha, Vata and Pitta dosha of our body. Its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties protect our skin against inflammation and oxidative damage by ROS species and show the therapeutic effect on Scleroderma affected areas.

Mix 1-2 tablespoon of Turmeric in half cup of water, mix it well until it forms a fine paste. Apply this paste directly on the affected area with the help of a cotton ball.
You can also apply Turmeric powder directly on the affected area. This will help to eliminate the free radicals from the body.
2. Onion
Onions have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties which overcome the action of free radicals. It softens the hard and tight skin patches. Sometimes, it becomes very uncomfortable due to stiffness, tightness, puffiness, and swelling in the hands and fingers. The anti-inflammatory property of Onion helps to eradicate swelling and stiffness.

Cut Onion into two halves and apply gently on the affected skin portion. Message it for 15-20 minutes every day.
On another hand, you can also apply onion juice on affected skin with the help of cotton balls.
3. Fish Oil
Fish oil is the richest source of Omega-3 fatty acids which helps to flush out the free radicals from our body. It also possesses antioxidant properties and maintains the proper functioning of the immune system. The fishes which are rich in omega-3 fatty acids are salmon, tuna, cod-liver, and herring. Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) are the main Omega-3 fatty acids present in fish oil. They provide shooting effects on your affected skin and are proven as the best home remedy for Scleroderma.

Apply Fish oil directly on scaly patches every day for relief.
You can also add tuna, salmon and cod-liver fish in your daily diet.
4. Triphala Decoction
Triphala constitutes three herbs i.e. Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Bibhitaki (Terminalia bellerica) and Amalaki (Emblica officinalis). All these three herbs work together and prevent us from various ailments. In scleroderma, this decoction is very beneficial in healing wounds.

Prepare a decoction of triphala and wash the affected area two times a day.
For Oral Intake
1. Spinach
Spinach is the richest source of vitamins, minerals, proteins, and dietary fibers. It contains Vitamin K, Vitamin A, Vitamin C, Vitamin E, and Vitamin B2. Spinach has a high level of chlorophyll and health-promoting beta-carotene, lutein, and zeaxanthin. Spinach contains minerals such as iron and phosphorus. Due to the high content of phytonutrients, spinach provides direct energy to cells and the immune system as well.

To eradicate the problem of Scleroderma you should add two cups of raw or steamed spinach in your diet daily.
To avoid the strong flavor of spinach and enhance its taste with benefits you can add vegetables such as carrot and tomatoes.
2. Tulsi Leaves
Tulsi is an amazing herb with a bundle of health properties such as antioxidant, antibacterial, antifungal, antipyretic, antiseptic and anti-cancerous. It manages all the cardiac, respiratory and lifestyle disorders very well.

You can take 1 cup of Tulsi tea daily in the morning
Also, tulsi leaves can be added in many dishes.
All the home remedies which are mentioned above are most effective for Scleroderma skin disorder. Along with these, you can also try gram flour, cottage cheese, and some physical activities. Physical activities increase the blood circulation in your body and reduce stiffness in the limbs.




109. Home Remedies for Skin Care
Skin Care

Skin is the largest organ of a human body. And it is of utmost importance to take proper care of the skin to look beautiful and appealing. However, it is one of the most sensitive organs of the body. Therefore, it requires tremendous care and tenderness to treat this part of the body effectively. There are various cosmetics available in the market, which help to treat various situations. But, treating the skin with the home remedies naturally is the most effective one.

Here we shall discuss some of the wonderful skin care home remedies to treat the various complications like scars, pimples, acne, oily skin condition and many more effectively.

Home Remedies for Skin Care
1. Wash Face With Clean Water
This is the primary skin care tip to be followed by every individual to have a glowing skin.
However, water should be clean and devoid of any chemicals and toxic materials.
This helps to remove all the dirt and dust particles, which get accumulated on the skin over a period of time.
This is one of the best solutions to treat the condition of oily skin and prevents the formation of acne, scars and pimples as well.
2. Honey And Cinnamon Paste
A paste is made using honey and cinnamon.
Water should not be added since it kills the action of the honey.
This is an effective home remedy to treat pimples and acnes away.
3. Sandal Wood
Rub the sandalwood on wooden base mixed with a little amount of rose water.
This gives rise to a paste like substance.
This, when applied on the acne scars for about a week can bring effective results.
Also, sandalwood soaked in water for a few hours and then applying the water on the scars is also a wonderful remedy to remove the acne scars.
Sandalwood has soothing and cooling effect on the skin to a huge extent.
4. Extracts of Fenugreek
Fenugreek seeds applied in water and the water is boiled for a few minutes.
Mash the seeds well and make a paste.
Then applied to the acne scars help in reducing the intensity and frequency of the appearance of the scars on the facial surface.
5. Egg, Sugar and Cornflour Mixture
The white part of the egg mixed with a tbsp of sugar and half tbsp of corn flour mixed to form a paste is applied on the parts of the face with unwanted hair.
The mixture forms a mask on the face.
Once the mixture is dried, it needs to be pulled off firmly, which will remove the facial hairs off from the face.
This is a highly effective home remedy for skin care.
6. Consume Green Leafy Vegetables
Consumption of green vegetables, steamed, blended or juiced helps in better metabolism of the food particles.
This helps to maintain a clean complexion of the skin and remove the under eye dark circles properly.
7. Drink Detox Tea Daily
Detox tea contains anti-oxidants, Consumption of which regularly enhances the various metabolic activities properly.
 Detox tea helps to kills the bacteria and make the skin look glowing and healthy.
8. Lemon Juice
Lemon contains ascorbic acid and flavonoids, which have antibiotic and anti-oxidating properties.
These anti-oxidants help in restricting the free radical generation, which makes it a wonderful remedy to treat pimples and other skin lesions and lighten the stretch marks on the skin.
 The Vitamin C or ascorbic acid also helps to lighten the color of the skin, thereby removing the dark spots and tan effectively.
9. Apple Cider Vinegar
Vinegar has antiseptic properties and also scraps off the dry cells from the skin surface.
These properties of apple cider vinegar are highly useful home remedies to treat acne scars.
10. Sugar
A tbsp of sugar added to a tsp of honey and a few drops of lemon juice heated in low flame to produce a smooth paste.
Then, it needs to be applied on those facial parts, from where the hairs need to be removed.
The sugar in the molten state imparts the sticky nature and honey and lemon provide soothing action to the skin and act as bleach as well.
11. Milk
The lactic acid in milk helps to get rid of darkened skin and tan effectively.
Raw milk applied on the spots and left for overnight, then, washed in the morning with a little warm water is a wonderful home remedy.
Tips
It is extremely important to keep away the basic reasons, which lead to the various skin related complications.
Stress, over exhaustion, unbalanced food habit, overloaded lifestyle and insomnia, if controlled or prevented can provide a healthy, glowing and beautiful skin devoid of any unnecessary complications.




110. Home Remedies for Sore Throat
Sore Throat

Sore throat is a microbial infection, which occurs due to the infection caused by certain fungi, virus or streptococcal bacteria. Sore throat occurs due to strained vocal cords, cold or strep throat. Environmental factors also play a certain role in the occurrence of this painful condition. It is characterized by hoarse, sick or scratchy throat, throat inflammation and difficulty in speaking.

Some of the major symptoms of sore throat include the following:
Throat Pain
Throat inflammation
Inflammed tonsil glands
Whooping cough
Breathing difficulty
Earache
Fever
Difficulty in swallowing
Besides these, there are many other painful symptoms, which make the patients feel extremely uncomfortable.

Useful Home Remedies for Sore Throat
1. Llicorice Root
Mix licorice roots with water and form a solution. Gargling with the solution provides relief from the soreness eases the pain and diminishes the coughing. It is a wonderful remedy for sore throat.

2. Slippery Elm
Slippery elm possesses substance like mucous in it. When slippery elm is mixed with water, a slick gel is formed with forms a coating and provides a soothing feeling. Put boiled water on the gel. Stir it thoroughly and drink the mixture. Slippery elm lozenges are also available in the market, which may also provide relief in this situation.

3. Honey
Honey mixed with tea also works wonderfully against throat soreness. It is a wonderful suppressant of cough and provides relief from respiratory ailments.

4. Salt Water Solution
Add a pinch of salt in a glass of warm water and drink it. This helps to kill the microorganisms and provides relief from the sore throat considerably.

5. Marshmallow Root (KHATMI IN SANSKRIT)
Put the dried roots to a cup of boiling water. And drink the mixture in the form of a tea. This solution is an effective home remedy for sore throat, which diminishes pain and eases the soreness.

6. Peppermint
Sprinkle some peppermint in the spray solution. Peppermint has antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, and antiviral characteristics. These encourage wound healing.

Tips
Drink lots of fluid
Grab enough rest
These are some of the wonderful home remedies to reduce inflammation, ease out the pain and get rid of sore throat condition !!




111. Home Remedies for Tendonitis
Tendonitis

Tendonitis means inflammation of the tendons. This is characterized by swelling, pain, redness, tenderness, weakness and restricted movement. It is mainly caused due to the excessive strain in the affected part of the body. Some other factors, which contribute to tendonitis are age, heredity, excessive weight gain, bone spurs, diabetes.

Effective Home remedies for tendonitis
1. Ice pack
Place ice pack on the region, which is affected. This will help to alleviate the swelling and the pain. If ice is not available, one can also make use of frozen vegetables. Put the ice pack on the affected area for about 15 minutes. Continue this process for a couple of times on a daily basis.

2. Apple cider vinegar
Apple cider vinegar has anti-inflammatory properties. It is effective for the treatment of inflammation, weakness and restricted movement. Add 1 tsp of honey to 2 tsps of apple cider vinegar. Drink the solution twice or thrice daily. This provides tremendous relief from tendonitis.

3. Cayenne Pepper
Cayenne pepper has capsaicin. This acts as a natural remover of pain. Also, this imparts a soothing and cooling action to the body. Add 2 tsps of cayenne pepper to half cup of olive oil, which is warm. Put the mixture on the injured area and keep for 20 minutes before removing it. Repeat this process a few times daily.

3. Carbonated water
Carbonated water is highly effective in treating tendonitis. Soak the feet in a sugarless carbonated water. Keep it for about 15 minutes. Repeat this process twice regularly. This provides relief from the pain, inflammation and redness. It also imparts a refreshing and rejuvenating feeling to the body. This is one of the important remedies, which help to get rid of the acute conditions of tendonitis.

Follow these home remedies correctly. You will definitely get relief from the pain and swelling to a huge extent. Also, remember that it is important to be careful and maintain all the precautions perfectly. This will prevent the occurrence of such painful situations to a huge extent.




112. Home Remedies For Trigeminal Neuralgia
Trigeminal Neuralgia
Introduction
There are many conditions in the world which make your appetite low, slow down your metabolism and make you thin as you don’t want to eat. But think about a situation where you crave for things but you can not have a single glass of water in just one go. That’s the scary part about trigeminal neuralgia. You want to eat, but the trigeminal nerve is like sorry I can’t let you because it hurts. Jokes apasrt, but this situation is serious because it makes patients’ lives more miserable then she or he have ever thought. Trigeminal neuralgia is a condition that makes you realise how cables carry the electric signal through a long channel.

As we all know that nerves are for carrying the electric impulses between the brain to various parts of the body but when the protecting sheath of these nerves degrades due to some reasons then situations like trigeminal neuralgia takes place. The protective sheath degradation can be due to a trauma. But sometimes lesions, tumours etc are also responsible for this. Trigeminal neuralgia is tormenting and is the terrible agony a human can have.

Let’s enlighten ourselves with causes of trigeminal neuralgia.

Causes For Trigeminal Neuralgia
Trigeminal neuralgia is a type of condition that develops due to many reasons but its specific cause is not mentioned in modern science still there is something that is causing the condition. The question is what is the reason? When the answer to this question was deeply searched in Ayurveda then a specific cause for the situation was discovered. The trigeminal neuralgia is the result of excessive vata dosha. As there is excess of vata dosha, the degradation of myelin sheath takes place resulting in the crossing of two electric signals from two different nerves thus causing the electric shock type of pain in this condition. That is how trigeminal neuralgia is understood in Ayurveda.

What is trigeminal neuralgia and its causes are now known to you so let’s discuss the most important part and that is home remedies.

Home Remedies For Trigeminal Neuralgia
Trigeminal neuralgia is difficult to handle when the actual pain strikes in. That current like sensation and the radiation are like stabbing from within. That’s the feeling of trigeminal neuralgia.

But for immediate management of this pain at home there are certain home remedies which can help. These home remedies are as follows:

Remedy 1: Whenever you feel that the shocking pain is back and it’s radiating once again take a cloth, dip it in warm water and squeeze. Then apply it on the region where you feel the pain. It is called a warm compress.
Remedy 2: Take a small amount of mustard oil and warm it using a water bath method. Once warm you can apply it over the affected area and can massage very gently (keeping in mind not to trigger the pain). Apply this warm oil at least twice daily to have great results.
Remedy 3: The third remedy includes application of oil. The oil is prepared in a very easy manner and also gives impressive results. So has to be done is mentioned in the steps below:
Take 100 ml of mustard oil and warm it in a utensil.
Now add 5-6 garlic cloves in this oil and let them become entirely brown.
Once they are golden brown, take the utensil off the stove and let the oil cool down a bit.
After this, transfer it into a glass bottle.
This oil is to be applied when the pain starts or when the pain triggers. Once applied it will give relief in pain and the shocking sensation will be gone.
Do’s and Don’ts For Trigeminal Neuralgia
Do’s and Don’ts are there for each and every disease and most of them are to be followed to get quick relief in your condition. These do’s and don’ts of trigeminal neuralgia are having two categories that are diet and lifestyle related do’s and don’ts. So let’s discuss them in detail.

Lifestyle related Do’s and Don’ts
One should avoid direct exposure to a cold environment.
Sleep on time and maintain a proper sleep wake cycle.
Maintain a proper lifestyle.
Do yoga and other form of exercise on regular basis.
Stress less as it can trigger the pain.
Anger management in cases of anger issues is must.
Watch for your bowel movements and bowel emptying.
Diet related Do’s and Don’ts
Drink not cold not hot water on regular basis.
Stop intake of dairy products in excess.
Have food which is easy to digest.
Avoid eating heavy pulses like kidney beans, black lentils etc.
In vegetables avoid eggplant and capsicums.
Don’t have food which is having hard consistency to chew.
Stop the intake of all type of packed and processed food articles.
Use cow’s ghee in your diet.



113. Home Remedies for Tinnitus
Tinnitus

Tinnitus is actually not a disease. It is a symptom, which can be caused due to a number of medical conditions. Tinnitus medically means “ringing in the ears”. It means there exists a perception of hissing, ringing or any other sound, even during the absence of any external sound. This may be severe or mild in intensity, constant or intermittent in nature and vary from just a throbbing to a high pitch to an extent that the individual may not be able to hear anything else. It need not be related to a hearing impairment.

The major causes are the damage to the hearing nerve, hearing loss, rupture in eardrum, ear infection, ear wax, tumors, allergies, cardiac and circulatory disorders, deposition of high level of cholesterol and long term application of the drugs as well.

Useful Home Remedies for tinnitus
1. Basil Leaf
Take some basil leaves. Crush them to form a paste. Extract the juice out of it. Heat the juice till it is lukewarm. Put 2 drops of this lukewarm juice on the affected part. Do it twice daily.

2. Onion
Make a paste of an onion. Press it on a sieve. Get the juice. Put 2 drops of the juice on the affected ear.

3. Garlic
This is yet another home remedy, which is helpful for tinnitus. It helps to reduce the inflammation and help in blood circulation through the various parts of the body effectively.

4. Pineapple
Consume pineapples on a regular basis. It has anti-inflammatory characteristic. It helps in blood circulation of the body. It forms an effective home remedy to treat tinnitus.

5. Raw Vegetables and Legumes
Consume foods, which are rich in amino acids, vitamins and phytogenic compounds. These help to reduce inflammation, which is essential for treating tinnitus. However, do not take food items containing salicylates. Avoid almonds, blackberries, apples, cucumbers, raspberries, tomatoes.

Important Tips
Stop smoking
Have low cholesterol, low fat diet
Stop consuming caffeine
Practice relaxation techniques
These are some of the effective home remedies for tinnitus. They are essential not only to remove the symptoms, but also, to treat the problem effectively from its roots !!




114. Home Remedies for Tonsils in Children
Tonsillitis - How to get rid of tonsils fast in children

Inflammation of the tonsils creates much discomfort among the individuals. Children, especially feel a lot of problems, if affected with this condition. Generally, this situation arises due to the viral or bacterial infections.

The major symptoms of tonsillitis include the following:
Sore throat
Difficulty in swallowing
Neck stiffness
Headache
Fever
White or yellow spots on the tonsils
If you want to get the rid of tonsils fast, it is essential to follow some home remedies. The ultimate way to get rid of the situation is surgery. But, to avoid surgery in the children, following home remedies for tonsils can be implemented.

Useful Home Remedies for Tonsils
Take lots of rest. This will provide rest to the throat, which will give ample time for the inflammation of the tonsils to reduce further.
Drink lemon tea mixed honey. This is an effective home remedy for treating tonsils in children. This tea provides relief from the symptoms and help to eradicate them completely.
Have fluids and liquid type foods. This will be helpful since your child will have difficulty in swallowing during this acute condition.
Have loads of water. This will help to prevent dehydration and dryness effectively.
 Have cold ice pops. This will impart soothing action to the sore throat condition and remove the discomfort considerably.
 Gargle with warm water. Add a pinch of salt to the water. This is effective in treating the infection and provides relief to the sore throat condition.
 Make a mixture using sugar, ginger and honey. Drink the mixture. It will also provide tremendous relief aiding to get rid of the stressful conditions of the throat, inflammation and pain.
 Make a solution using warm water and honey. Gargle with the mixture. This will provide relief from the painful and stiff conditions of tonsils.
 Hot honey milk is also an effective home remedy. You can add some paste of ginger to the solution. This provides soothing action to the patients.
 Drink orange juice. It contains Vitamin C, which helps to fight the microorganism causing the infection.
 Make a solution with green tea and honey. Drink it. It also acts as an effective home remedy for tonsils in children.
Follow the above simple home remedies and get rid of the inflamed tonsils !!




115. Home Remedies for Ulcerative Colitis
Ulcerative Colitis

Ulcerative colitis is an inflammatory disease which affects your large intestinal area and causes long-lasting inflammation and ulcer sore that produces pus and mucus. Under such condition, the immune system attacks the healthy intestinal cells and cause inflammation of those cells. It affects the innermost lining of colon and rectum and causes bleeding in the stool. It is somehow associated with another type of inflammatory bowel disease such as “Crohn’s disease.

Various factors such as good diet control, immunity, inflammation and some fruits need attention. You can manage this condition up to a good extent with some of wonderful home remedies for ulcerative colitis.

Symptoms of Ulcerative Colitis
Rectal pain
Abdominal cramping
Fatigue
Weakness
Weight loss
Bloating
Abdomen pain
Loss of appetite
Abnormal bowel movement
Blood in stool
Diarrhea
Causes of Ulcerative Colitis
Unhealthy lifestyle
Bacterial infection
Low Immunity
Foreign particles
Complication of Ulcerative Colitis
Bone loss
Severe bleeding
Inflammation of skin, joints, and eye
Colon cancer
A hole in the colon
Blood clots in veins and arteries
Liver infection
Home Remedies for Ulcerative Colitis
1. Coconut water
Coconut water has great healing property, it provides cooling effects to your body and helps to maintain the digestive fire and vitiated ama in the body which is the main reason for ulcerative colitis. It is the best aid for all types of digestive disorders. Coconut water reduces the swelling and also soothes the mucous membrane of the colon and rectum.

Drink 1-2 glasses of coconut water twice daily.
Do this for a few weeks continuously, you will definitely see some positive results.
2. Seesam leaves juice
The botanical name of the herb is Dalbergia sissoo. The plant is bitter, astringent, pungent in taste and dry in qualities and light to digest. After digestion, it converts into the pungent taste and is hot in potency. The decoction or juice made from Seesam leaves provides relief form the symptoms of ulcerative colitis. The major chemical constituents of Seesam leaves are tectorigenin, and iochanin A.

Take few fresh leaves of Seesam tree, and crush them in the grinder by adding one cup of water in it. 
Strain and drink this juice twice daily before your meal.
Do this regularly for few months until you get relief.
3. Pomegranate juice
Pomegranate is used for reducing the symptoms of ulcerative colitis such as dysentery, and diarrhea. Not only the juice but the tea made from leaves of this fruit also helps in treating digestion related problems. The Pomegranate also neutralize the acids in the stomach. The juice helps to reduce the inflammation in the gut and provides relief from ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, and IBD.

Make a fresh juice of pomegranate.
Drink it in the early morning before your meal
Do this continuously for one month.
4. Fenugreek leaves and seeds
The common name of the herb is methi. It helps to protect the digestive tract by forming protective covering along the digestive tract. The mucilage in fenugreek seeds helps to reduce the symptoms such as hurt-burn, acid reflux and assist in soothing gastrointestinal inflammation and swelling in the intestinal lining.

Soak 1-2 tablespoon of fenugreek seeds overnight.
Drink the water in next morning with empty stomach
Do this regularly for a few months.
5. Yogurt
Yogurt contains lots of naturally occurring probiotics that help to boost and strengthen your digestive tract. The probiotics in yogurt also maintain a healthy immune system. Yogurt provides relief from ulcerative symptoms such as indigestion, bloating, upset stomach and abdominal pain.

Eat one bowl of yogurt in the morning daily with your breakfast.
Do this for few months regularly this will definitely show some positive results within a few weeks.
6. Bananas
Banana is the great option for the people who are suffering from acid reflux problem during ulcerative colitis. The pectin content in banana helps to ease the digestion related problems. Rutin is an active compound in banana which possesses anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties that are helpful for reducing inflammation in the inner lining of intestine and stomach. It is also well-tolerated fruit among all fruits and contains a variety of nutrients.

You can eat a 3-4 or even more bananas daily as per your need.
Continuous and regular consumption is important.
7. Rose Petal
The fresh rose petal helps to reduce heartburn and acidity. Cooling nature of rose petal is useful in relieving the burning sensation. The rose petals contain sedative, antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-parasitic properties. These petals balance the vitiated pitta in ulcerative patient and maintain the digestive fire.

Soak rose petals overnight in water.
Drink the water in the next morning in an empty stomach.
You can also chew a few rose petals daily with an empty stomach.
Alternatively you can also make gulkand from rose petal and have it daily. This will also soothe your intestine.
8. Sandalwood powder
Sandalwood contains anti-viral, anti-inflammatory and antiseptic properties. All these properties help to provide relief from intestinal inflammation and burning. You can have this power with sugar, honey and washed water of rice. It improves intestine function and show some positive effects on the digestive system. And also provides relief from bleeding and diarrhea.

Mix Sandalwood powder with 3 gram honey and sugar.
Take this paste with rice washed water, twice daily.
9. Chamomile tea
Chamomile is an herb which has been used or consumed from centuries as a natural remedy for a variety of health-related issues. It is caffeine free and loaded with various antioxidant compounds that prevent the oxidative damages in the body due to action of free radical. The tea helps to reduce acidity problem in ulcerative patients and also inhibit the growth of bacteria which are contributes in ulcer development.

Take few dried flower of chamomile and add them in one cup of boiling water.
Stir for 5 minutes.
Strain and cool down for few mints.
Drink it twice daily (morning, evening) before your meals.
10. Carrot soup
Carrot is the good source of beta-carotene, vitamin K, fibers, potassium, antioxidants, and enzymes that aid in digestion. The carrot juice helps to protect your mucosa lining from microorganism and triggers the numbers of conditions such as ulcers, gastritis, and inflammation of gastric mucosa. This soup also provides relief from ulcerative colitis symptoms such as heartburn, abdominal pain, vomiting, and abdominal spasm.

Take 2-3 carrot, peel them and cut into small pieces.
Take one cup of water in pan and add chopped carrot into it.
Boiled the carrot for 10-15 minutes.
After 15 minutes, thoroughly crushed them in blender.
Take a pan with few drops of sunflower oil in it and add few cumin seeds to it.
Stir for 1-2 minutes on medium flame then add blended carrot in it.
Cook this soup for 2-3 minutes and then strain
You can have this twice daily.
All ulcerative colitis is a chronic inflammatory disease which disturbs your regular bowel movement. All the home remedies which are mentioned above are really very effective during ulcerative colitis and you should try them.





116. How to Treat Urticaria with Home Remedies?
Urticaria

Urticaria is a skin disorder in which there is formation and development of red itchy rashes and small bumps on the skin. This may be due to some food or medicine allergy. In Ayurveda, this condition is known as Sheetapitta. It is of two types that is acute (lasting less than 6 weeks) and chronic (lasting more than 6 weeks). There are many ways to treat, soothe and get rid of Urticaria. Natural home remedies are the best solution for this skin disorders.

1. Apple Cider Vinegar
Apple cider vinegar has been used for many home remedies from many years due to its great health benefits. In the case of Urticaria, skin tissues release the histamine a harmful chemical into the bloodstream which further causes some allergic reaction in your skin. Apple cider vinegar helps us to prevent such allergic reaction on our skin by its antihistamine property. Due to its acetic nature, apple cider vinegar has many potent biological effects on our body and also helps to kill the harmful bacteria and viruses which further worsens the skin problem.

Add one tablespoon of apple cider vinegar in one cup of lukewarm water. Add a few drops of honey to it and drink it every morning with an empty stomach.
You can also soak your body in water and APC solution. For this add one to two cup of apple cider vinegar in a bathtub filled with lukewarm water. Soak your body for 20-25 minutes once in a day.
2. Aloe Vera
Aloe Vera is a very powerful herb which has anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, antibacterial, anti-fungal properties which is helpful in the treatment of Urticaria. It keeps your skin smooth, soft and gives a cooling effect to your skin. According to the Ayurvedic point of view, aloe vera is bitter in taste, cold in potency, oily, sticky and slimy in qualities. This herb balances all the three doshas (kapha, pitta, and vata). The herb contains two hormones auxin and gibberellins which protect our skin from swelling due to its anti-inflammatory properties. The leaves of aloe vera contain phytochemicals such as acetylated mannans, anthraquinones, hormones, amino acid, carbohydrates, fatty acids, and enzymes, which are helpful to eradicate swollen, pale-red bumps from the skin.

Apply the fresh aloe vera gel on your affected areas, leave it for 10-15 minutes and after that rinse it with lukewarm water.
Repeat this remedy for 4-5 times in a day.
Also mix the aloe vera gel with coconut oil, with the help of cotton pad apply it gently on your skin.
3. Basil
Basil also contains natural antihistamine properties, which are very effective for Urticaria. This herb is a very good source of ursolic acid, eugenol, linalol, rosmarinic acid, etc. The Ursolic acid present in Basil helps to increase the collagen and ceramides, both of which play a vital role in skin rejuvenation and remove skin redness and itchiness. It has very good antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-bacterial and anti-stress properties. According to the medicinal point of view this herb is Pungent, bitter in taste, dryness in qualities, and hot in potency. It undergoes pungent taste after digestion.

Add some dried leaves of holy basil in a hot jar of water. Leave it for 10-15 minutes. Then with the help of cotton cloth or balls apply this mixture on the affected area of your skin.
You can also apply the thick paste of basil fresh basil leaves on your skin, allow it to dry and after that rinse it with cool water.
4. Ginger
In addition to great benefits for the digestive system, this amazing warming spice also shows effective results for Urticaria due to its anti-inflammatory and antihistamine property. Ginger helps to provide relief from several problems such as gas, bloating, cramps, and diarrhea. In Ayurveda, ginger has great benefits due to its medicinal properties such as pungent in taste, heavy, strong and dryness in qualities, hot in potency and balances the kapha dosha.

Take some chopped ginger slice, ¼ cup of brown sugar, few drops of apple cider vinegar. Boil all of them with one cup of water. Strain, and dab this solution on the affected area of your skin with the help of cotton balls.
Alternatively, you can also drink the ginger tea by adding a few drops of honey to it. This will also help to heal your skin.
5. Turmeric
Turmeric has been used for many years in Ayurveda due to its great Ayurvedic properties. There are numbers of active substances present in Turmeric, out of which curcumin is the most important curcuminoids in turmeric which helps to overcome the symptom of Urticaria. Medicinal properties of turmeric are bitter, pungent in taste, dryness, and lightness in qualities after digestion undergoes pungent taste and it is hot in potency. Turmeric balances all the three doshas of our body. It has anti-inflammatory, antihistamine, antioxidant properties which cure various skin alignments including hives and Urticaria.

Add 1 tablespoon of turmeric powder in one cup of lukewarm water, mix and drink it two times a day.
You should add turmeric in your daily food.
6. Mint
Due to its great soothing and cooling properties this herb is also useful for the treatment of Urticaria. Along with these properties, this herb also contains analgesic, antiseptic and anti-inflammatory agents. It reduces symptoms of Urticaria such as redness, swelling, itchiness and skin infections. The main bioactive compounds of mint are menthol, limonene, and menthone. According to ayurvedic view mint (Pudina) is pungent in taste, strong, dry and light in qualities, hot in potency and balances the vitiated kapha and vata dosha.

Boil the one tablespoon of mint leaves powder in one cup of water for 5 minutes. Strain and cool it for some time in the refrigerator. Wash your inflammation and irritated skin with this solution 3-4 times a day.
7. Nettle
Nettle is an excellent nourishing and rejuvenating herb which provides great relieves from the Urticaria or hives. This herb is rich in a bioactive compound such as phenols, vitamins A, C, D, K and minerals such as calcium, potassium, phosphorus, iron, and sulfur. Its anti-inflammatory and astringent property provide relives from swelling, inflammation, and itching.

Add one tablespoon of dried nettle leaf to a cup of hot water, leave it for 5-10 minutes, strain, add few drops of honey and drink this tea 2-3 times a day.
All the home remedies which are mentioned above are most effective for Urticaria disorder. Along with these, you can also try baking soda, colloidal oatmeal, and cold compress home remedy. These home remedies will help you to reduce the intensity of Urticaria.





117. Home Remedies for Underweight
Underweight

The busy life schedule is the result of the various health related complications. One such problem is Underweight. People, who are underweight are often conscious about their appearance and want to gain weight substantially to look good.

Basic Causes of Underweight
Some of the basic causes are given below:
Poverty
Anorexia Nervosa
Bulimia Nervosa
Heredity
Hyperthyroidism
Anxiety
Depression
Common Symptoms
Low body weight
Tiredness
Dizziness
Frequent illness due to poor immune system.
Apart from these, women, who are underweight may also experience irregular periods.
Major Home Remedies for Underweight
To treat this situation, there are several home remedies available.
1. Banana Milk Shake
This acts as a superb home remedy to treat the situation of underweight.
It helps to gain a few kilos of weight quite easily and at a faster pace.
Add small pieces of banana in a glass of milk in a mixer to make banana milk shake.
Add sugar according to the taste and need.
Drink it every day.
2. Hot Milk with Honey
This is yet another way to gain weight.
Drinking hot milk mixed with 1 tsp of honey everyday work wonders.
3. Milk with Almonds and Dates
Almonds, dates (without seed) are mixed in milk and boiled.
Then this milk is consumed, when warm.
This helps to increase the weight of the individuals to a great extent.
4. White Muesli Powder, Indian Ginseng Root Powder and Pomegranate Seed Powder
A combination of the above three ingredients in equal proportions with a glass of milk or water act as a superb supplement in gaining weight and toning up muscles as well.
This should be taken twice daily for about a month to achieve effective results.
5. Figs
Figs make another excellent home remedy for natural weight gain.
Soak three dried figs in water and consume twice daily.
Tips
It is recommended that the underweight people shall consume small meals frequently.
Also, foods shall be consumed considering the calorie that the body can gain from those food products.
Besides diet, regular exercise is absolutely important to maintain a proper health and remain fit.




118. Home Remedies for Uterine Fibroids
Uterine Fibroids

Uterine fibroids are extremely common among women infect many of them get it at some point in their life.
Uterine fibroids are usually non cancerous growth that takes place in or out side of woman’s uterus in her child bearing age and appear in rubbery mass that can be differentiate from other tissues.
There are no definite causes why uterine fibroids take place.
It has no symptoms usually but includes abnormal bleeding with pain and pressure depending upon the size.
Homw Remedies for Uterine Fibroids
Use of turmeric in diet items, as it reduces inflammation has been proved effective.
Ginger Root (Zingiber officinalis): A wonderful herb used to increase circulation and promote blood flow to the uterus. The increased circulation also helps to reduce inflammation of the uterus, ovaries or fallopian tubes. One can take juice out of it 1- 2tsp for two times mixed with little suger.
Brisk walk for at least 20 minutes is very beneficial.
Body massage including lower abdomen with warm castor oil is very effective.
Aloe Vera juice consumption every morning empty stomach daily has been proved very effective to improve female reproductive system.
Tips –
Opt for balanced diet including leafy vegetables, fresh fruits etc for good digestion.
High fiber diet is highly recommended.
Avoid much spicy, hot, junk food.
Fish salmon has got anti-inflammatory actions so shreds the fibroid.
Make some light exercises a part of daily routine.




119. How to Treat Urinary Tract Infection without Medication ?

It is an infection that is worst, it pains when a person urinates, and you don’t feel like having anything to drink. Deficiency of water is inevitable; dehydration has to happen, making you very prone to be attacked by numerous bacteria, causing many diseases. Urinary tract infection (UTI) spreads to your kidneys, bladder and urethra. In UTI the most usual method is that bacteria come from the bowels, it is accompanied by virus and fungus alongside. 80% of cases have Staphylococcus saprophyticus and Escherichia coli strains of bacteria.

Home Remedies for UTI

Female species are more prone to this disease as their urethra is shorter than males, making bacteria to slide in easily. 50% of ladies do get infected at some part of their life. Some of its symptoms are like a burning sensation during peeing, cloudy or dark colored urine, some of the urine remains saturated in bladder, frequent urination, pelvic pain, and urine has a strong & bad odor.

Home Remedies for Urinary Tract Infection
There are various ways to protect ourselves from this ailment; we’ll discuss some of them with you:

1. Drink Lots of Liquids
Drink plenty of water and nutritious drinks that help in keeping you healthy and liquid drinks create more urine that chases out all the toxins from the body, making you infection free. Don’t go for drinks that carry alcoholic beverages, when taken in excess, these will just damage the liver. These are fine if taken in a limiting, but when we Indians begin drinking, no one sees a limit. More than 2 lakh deaths were reported in 2017, because of liver trouble. Go for some healthy drinks and drive away the bacteria via urine.

2. Fruit and Vegetable Intake
Vitamin C is an arch rival of the bacteria causing UTI. It is available in a number of vegetables and fruits like red peppers, kiwi fruit, grapefruit, and oranges. Eating these can increase your vitamin C proficiency; you get help in destroying the bacteria. It destroys the acidity of urine, thus the bacteria perishes. During pregnancy taking 100 milligrams of vitamin C becomes mandatory, to avoid any infection. It becomes their spouse’s duty to bring in all these fruits and vegetables for them. All these should be authentically organic.

3. Unsweetened Cranberry Juice
It is a well known fact that to avoid getting infected, cranberry juice is powered enough to deal with the infection solely. It doesn’t allow bacteria to adhere to the walls of the bladder. It blocks its way. Pregnant ladies who are more prone to getting infected have to drink 240ml of cranberry juice daily. It prevents bacteria from arriving and striking again. It has an ingredient called proanthocyanidins, which helps in terminating the infection completely. Cranberry juice shouldn’t carry any artificial recipes along; otherwise it may lose its charm.

4. Garlic
It prevents you from dozens of diseases, because of the presence of allicin, which remains active the moment you crush a fresh garlic. It also has a number of antimicrobial activities that help terminate the bacteria, causing infection. Allicin, totally functions to eradicate the large range of bacteria, even drug resistant of E. coli are worn out. It has anti-fungal features that combat with candida albicans, which arouse infection.

5. Urinate Frequently
If you hold your urine for long, the bacteria in it multiply manifold. It keeps sticking to the walls of the bladder and helps infection grow and reaches your urethra, creating urinary tract infection. So you should urinate more often and throw out the bacteria along with your urine. Don’t give it a chance to hang around in your body. One should always urinate after a bout of sex is over.

6. Remain Clean and Dry
A person should always remain clean, as dirtiness always invites the bacteria to accumulate and cause infection. It’s better to stay dry, especially after any bowel movement, females need to wipe from back to the front. Rub the towel in an aggressive way, after having a bath. Thus the bacteria will not enter their urethra. Wear loose clothes and a cotton underwear, which soaks the wetness. The air passing through losing clothes will keep the urethra dry, especially when they get pregnant. Wearing nylon panties will trap the moisture, making bacteria flourish.

7. Use Clove Oil
Urinary tract infection can make you feel the pain and it doesn’t go away quickly, the way you wish it to disappear. A nail of clove essential oil can make you bear the pain, as it has an ingredient called eugenol, which is an ardent enemy of the bacteria. It completely eradicates it and flushes it out of the body. You also might suffer from abdominal pain, it is too seething. You seem to do nothing about it, but wish it to disappear. Clove oil reduces it by destroying the bacteria and relieving you from UTI. It is a bladder bomb that cleans it in an amazing way.

8. Tea Tree Oil
This oil has anti-bacterial features, it makes the bacteria vaporize, if applied on it directly. Never drink it through the mouth, it can be hazardous. It is easier for the males and a little difficult for the females as it can’t be inserted in their vagina. Tea tree oil blocks the way of bacteria of E. coli, mostly it is the one that spreads infection. Tea tree oil does have the efficacy to flush this bacteria out.

9. Baking Soda
This home remedy is present in all the kitchens and can be used to remove UTI, its basic job is to reduce acidity of your urine. It helps in lowering your pain and create an environment which is not good for bacteria to linger on. All you have to do is mix its 2 or 3 spoons of powder with plain water. Just drink it for a few days and you can feel your pain depleting very soon.

10. Apple Cider Vinegar
It is rich in having enzymes, potassium and many more compounds that helps in evaporating bacteria from your body. It doesn’t allow it to grow or spread. It is a natural anti-biotic. Mix it in a huge glass of filtered water and drink it twice a day. You will feel its effects in a few days. You can add honey to it, to sweeten it according to your taste.

These are some of the natural remedies to treat UTI and its creepy pain. If your UTI is in the initial stages, it will get cured within 2 or 3 days, but if it is still persisting, it will be better to take the advice of some expert health provider.



120. Home Remedies for Varicose Veins
Varicose Veins 

Varicose veins is a common medical condition. The enlarged veins occur near the surface of the skin. They are usually found in the thighs and calf muscles. The veins become weak and the valves become under developed. This helps in abnormal regulation of the flow of blood.

The symptoms of varicose veins are fatigue, pain, restlessness, throbbing, burning sensation, heaviness in the legs and bulging veins.

The major reasons for such a condition are intake of birth control pills, menopause, puberty, hormonal changes during pregnancy and obesity. Genetics also play a huge role in causing varicose veins.

There are many surgical treatments. These are extremely costly. Instead, there are some effective home remedies, which treat varicose veins easily. The home remedies decrease the severity of the issue and make a body fit.

IMPORTANT HOME REMEDIES FOR VARICOSE VEINS
The important home remedies for treating the situation of varicose veins are listed below.

1. APPLE CIDER VINEGAR
It is an effective home remedy for treating this condition.
This acts as a natural way to clean the body.
It improves the blood circulation and rate of flow of the blood within the body.
As soon as the natural blood circulation starts, the situation of varicose vein tends to decrease.
Apply some undiluted amount of apple cider vinegar on skin affected with varicose vein condition.
Gently, massage it.
Repeat this process daily before off to bed.
Also, carry out this process in the morning as well.
This is very effective.
Also have 2 tbsp. of apple cider with a big glass of water daily for better results.
2. CAYENNE PEPPER
Cayenne pepper has a lot of bioflavonoids and Vitamin C.
This improves blood circulation and the condition of swollen veins.
Drink a mixture containing one tsp. of cayenne powder in Luke warm water thrice daily.
Do this for at least three months.
This is highly essential to get rid of the varicose situation.
3. OLIVE OIL
Olive oil helps in circulating blood effectively.
This treats the varicose veins.
Massage with olive oil in a circular motion.
This helps to get rid of swelling and pain.
Repeat this process two times daily.
4. GARLIC
Garlic is a wonderful home remedy for reducing pain and inflammation related to varicose vein condition.
It removes the toxic materials from the blood vessels.
This helps in easy circulation in the body.
It is recommended to have fresh garlic in the regular diet.
These home remedies help to maintain the hormonal balance in the body and get rid of the condition of varicose vein.




121. Home Remedies For Viral Fever
Abstract
Fever is a very common symptom. Whenever any foreign microbe enters the body of the individual then the first reaction of the body is fever. This fever is dangerous if it increases highly but sometimes it works in favour such as whenever temperature rises in the body it does not provide a suitable environment for proliferation of microbial growth. Some home remedies are discussed below in this article for the management of viral fever.

Home Remedies for Viral Fever
Introduction
Fever as per most of the physicians they describe it like fever is a temperature which is higher than normal. This definition is not complete without the importances of anatomical sites and what are the causes which are responsible for this. Monitoring the body temperature for the first time is not known. But ancient medical books like Charak samhita mention various types of fever in it. Fever is known to be ‘jwar’ in ayurveda which is critical and important among all the diseases because it affects every individual i.e it is put on first place as per classical textbook of ayurveda. Fever is a noted feature in almost every disease; the response for febrile conditions are due to its involvement with the central nervous system and through endocrine, neurological, immunological and behavioural mechanisms. Fever is not only a rise of temperature but it is accompanied by various changes in the body like metabolic and physiological changes.

Types Of Fever
According to the duration of the fever:

Continuous Fever – In this type of fever, fever is not fluctuating from more than 1℃ and not becoming normal at any time.
Intermittent Fever – This type of fever present for some hours during the day.
Remittent Fever – This type of fever is of fluctuating nature and fever changes more than 2℃ but not becoming normal at any time.
Sign And Symptoms Of Fever
Sweating
Chills and shivering
Headache
Muscles aches
Loss of appetite
Dehydration
Generalised weakness
Causes Of Fever
Infectious –  Virus, bacteria, parasites, fungal fever or due to any other microbial agent etc
Non infectious – Autoimmune disease, trauma, malignancy, drug induced fever, other causes like transfusion of blood, central fevers, intra abdominal, pulmonary etc.
Let’s now discuss one of the most common types of fever which is viral fever. Viral fever is caused by a viral agent. In this type of fever the common symptoms which can be seen are as follows: high grade fever, burning in the eyes, headaches, body aches, nausea and vomiting. It is common among childrens and old age individuals because of their low immunity. This fever is not an illness basically it is a symptom of an underlying cause which is viral infection. Human body can be affected with many types of viral infections which can cause either low grade fever or high grade fever.

Pathogenesis
Viral fever is an infectious type of fever which is transmitted through one person to another. An Infected person transmits the infection to another person through yawning, sneezing, coughing or even talking if the other person is near to the infected person. Once the virus enters in the body system of the healthy individual it takes 16 hrs to 48 hrs to show the symptoms of fever prominently.

Fever As Jwara (Described In Ayurveda)
Jwara is described in Atharvaveda as takman (Son of God Varuna) and drugs like kustha and anjana are given to manage this. References of jwara are also given in other non medical literature like mahabharat, puranas etc. Acharya sushuruta explained it like man in this world comes with this and departs from the world with it. Jwara not only affects the physical body but also the mind also.

Jwara Uttpati
According to Ayurveda, Jwara originated from the destructive and hot breath of lord shiva which was produced due to anger and grief of shiva after his wife (Durga) died.Jwara is the king of diseases, destroyer of every individual health so we must be cautious about it and take it seriously.

Home Remedies For Viral Fever
For Consuming (Eating)
Black Pepper And Ginger Tea – It is beneficial in patients of viral fever who have irregular bowels. Black pepper helps in detoxification of the body and ginger has an analgesic, anti-inflammatory property which helps in viral fever.

Use – Make a tea with the use of ginger and black pepper into hot water.

Coriander Seed Tea – Coriander is a rich source of vitamins and phytonutrients. It naturally helps in boosting immunity of patients. Coriander tea is helpful in soothing symptoms like running nose.

Use – Add coriander seed in water and a little bit of milk with honey.

Tulsi Leaves – Tulsi has many important properties like antibacterial and antibacterial which helps in viral fever.

Use – Take one cup of water and add 6-7 leaves of tulsi, boil till it remains half and drink.

Garlic – There are many hidden benefits of garlic which is very useful in the treatment of fever. It has antiviral properties and antibacterial properties which help lower the temperature of the body during fever. It acts as a natural detoxifier.

Use – It can be used in raw form like just take 2-3 cloves from 1 garlic and chewed or can be used in cooking.

For Local Application
Sandalwood Paste – It is known generally for its cooling property. It will help in lowering down the temperature and also have anti inflammatory properties. It should be used in the form of thick paste and applied several times a day on the forehead.

Sponging – It can be done at home by anyone easily. Sponging basically is done in case of high fever but antipyretic drugs should also be administered. Take a cotton cloth dipped in tepid water (water should not be cold)and place it on the forehead, stomach, palm and back of the patient. It should be done for 15-20 minutes.

Apple Cider Vinegar – This is a very useful home remedy for fever. It helps in lowering down the fever. This works like withdrawing fever from the body.
Take a washcloth and soak it in the solution of water and apple cider vinegar then place it on your forehead and stomach.

Drink Fluids – Dehydration is commonly seen in patients with viral fever so it is important to take proper fluids. In viral fever the patient’s body remains much warmer than usual; this causes sweating to cool down body temperature. Electrolytes may be imbalanced so normal water is not enough. Any of these can be used: soups, decaffeinated tea, electral etc.

Some Herbs For “Jwara”
Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza Glabra)
Properties
Rasa –  Madhura (sweet), Guna – Guru (heavy), Vipaka – Madhura (sweet), Veerya – Sheeta (cold)

Due to its veerya it is helpful in lowering down the temperature of the body and works like antipyretic.

Guduchi (Tinospora Cordifolia)
Properties
Doshatrayahara (balance tridosha – vata, pita, kapha)

It is well known as “Giloy” it is used widely in the treatment of fever, diabetes, urinary tract disorder, anaemia, jaundice etc

Papaya (Carica Papaya)
Carica papaya have antihelminthic, anti protozoan, antibacterial, antifungal, anti viral, anti- inflammatory and antioxidative properties.These medicinal properties of carica papaya are very much beneficial for the patient against dengue virus.

Conclusion
Home Remedies have been used for many centuries and they are giving beneficial results. But it should be from a relevant source otherwise it will be harmful for the patient. If individuals are using these home remedies and still not getting results then they have to consult the doctor and also mention these remedies to provide correct information to the physician so that it will be helpful during treatment.




122. Home Remedies for Wart
Wart

Wart takes place when the HPV (human papillomavirus) gets into the cut of the skin. The warts, at times develop in clusters. And, they develop individually as well. They also appear as the pale growth of the skin on a rough surface. The tiny blood capillaries appear to be dark spots. These grow to the center of the warts.

To treat such a situation, there are several effective home remedies. These home remedies help to get away with the condition easily.

EFFECTIVE HOME REMEDIES FOR WARTS
1. GARLIC
Garlic has many medicinal properties.
It has antiseptic, anti-biotic, anti-allergic and anti-inflammatory properties.
Take crushed garlic and rub them on the warts.
Or, eat fresh cloves of garlic.  This is extremely effective in treating warts effectively.
2. BAKING POWDER
Mix some amount of baking powder and castor oil together to form a paste.
Apply it on the wart and keep it overnight.
Remove it next morning.
Repeat the process as required.
This helps to wash off the wart affected part of the body easily.
This is helpful in treating warts.
3. CARROTS
Carrot is rich in essential nutrients. Grate a few pieces of carrots and mix with olive oil to form a paste. Apply the paste two times on the warts. Keep it for 30 minutes. Then, remove it off. This helps in treating warts effectively.

4. LEMON JUICE AND ONION
The combination of lemon juice and onion is very helpful to treat warts easily.
Apply some amount of lemon juice on the warts.
Cover them with pieces of onion for about half an hour.
Repeat the process once daily for about three to four weeks. You will definitely get effective results.
5. ALOE VERA
This is yet another important home remedy to treat warts.
The gel from the aloe vera stem or the juice from the aloe vera leaves is extremely effective in treating warts.
Apply it on the affected area with a cotton ball.
Cover with a bandage.
Carry out this process on a daily basis till the wart is gone.
Besides, whole breads, rice, sunflower seeds, sweet potatoes, broccoli, oranges are some other important food items, which help to treat warts effectively. Follow these home remedies and lead a healthy life.




123. Home Remedies for Weight Loss Naturally
Weight Loss

Before explaining about home remedies useful to fight obesity naturally, let’s know about obesity and the reasons which contribute to present with extra body fat and what may be the various complications.

The widespread problem in today’s computerized era experienced by people around the world is none other than overweight or excess weight that is known as obesity.

Obesity is a medical condition where body fat accumulates in excess so that it may have adverse effects on health. Being obese or over weight can reduce life expectancy and increased health problems.

There are numerous causes for obesity:-
Hereditary
Endocrine disorders
Excessive intake of food
Lack of physical activity
Nutritional deficiencies
Medications
Obesity may be the reason for various health ailments such as type 2 diabetes, cancer, heart disorders, osteoarthritis, obstructive sleep apnea etc therefore some tips about home remedies on weight loss are given below.

Home Remedies for Weight Loss
Mix one teaspoon of honey and half of lemon in one glass of lukewarm water. Drink this mixture every day early morning in empty stomach to clear your bowels and for glowing skin. This is an effective home remedy to lose weight naturally.
Green tea is best for obese people as it contains strong antioxidant that removes toxins and waste from body and keeps body fit and fine. For better results it should be taken without sugar.
Parsley juice is another effective home remedy to lose weight naturally. Parsley is good for kidneys and removes toxins from body.
Apple and pear both are packed with fiber and water. Eating 2 small apples or pears a day keeps your stomach full and helps to lose weight naturally.
Apple cider vinegar mixed with water is used to remove extra fat from body. One can take 2 tsp of apple cider vinegar at bed time that helps to cut down fat when you are sleeping.
Bottle gourd juice is very healthy drink. It keeps stomach full for so many hours and gives zero fat.
Cranberry juice also helps to lose weight naturally from body as it is rich in vitamin C and contains strong antioxidant.
Tips
Stay away from white products.
Try eating small amount of food.
Eat healthy.
Drink plenty of water.
Fasting once a week is needed to improve metabolism.
Exercise regularly




124. Top 7 Home Remedies for Weight Gain
Don’t go for unreliable weight gain products available in the market because it’s the matter of your health. Though good thing is by following the healthy food choices you can put on weight easily. What are you waiting for??? Just step in your kitchen and start using natural things for weight gain.

Home Remedies for Weight Gain
1. Banana and milk
Banana and milk combination is at top home remedies for weight gain. Bananas are great in carbohydrates, potassium, dietary fibre, Vitamins C and B6. They help in weight gain and also boost up the good energy levels in body.

How to use?
Take two ripe bananas for breakfast.
After that drink a glass of warm milk with cream.
Have this breakfast regularly for a month.
It must be taken only in the morning and never after dinner.
Top 7 Home Remedies for Weight Gain
2. Dry fruits
Dry fruits intake is an effective natural way to put on weight. Almonds, walnuts, peanuts and raisins are the good options. Almonds are rich in polyunsaturated fats, which enhance healthy calories to your diet whereas raisins are rich in essential fatty acids that aid in weight gain. Additionally, raisins provide important nutrients to the body. So the regular consumption of handful of dry fruits is quite good to put on weight.

How to use?
Boil three- four almonds, two- three dates and one-two dried fig in a glass of milk.
Drink the warm milk along with boiled almonds, figs and dates.
Another Option is:-

Soak ¼ cup of raisins and five to six dried figs in water overnight.
Consume it in two parts.
Follow it for about a month.
3. Mangoes
Mangoes are the among everyone’s favorite fruit list. Are you aware about the weight gaining properties of this fruit? It is the rich source of minerals and vitamins and free of sodium, cholesterol and fat. The body conserve the fructose from the mango as energy and fat, thus it helps to put on the weight.

How to use?
Drink mango milkshake twice daily for a month.
Alternatively, eat one ripe mango followed by a glass of milk. Do this two or three times a day for a month.
4. Peanut Butter
Peanut butter is a superb way of consuming calories, vitamins, minerals and several other nutritious elements.

How to use?
Spread peanut butter on the toast or a piece of whole wheat bread. By doing this you will observe the noticeable change in your weight.

5. Sweet Potato
Sweet potatoes are the great source of vitamin A (beta carotene), vitamin C, copper, manganese and vitamin B6. Additionally, they are a good source of potassium, magnesium, dietary fiber, phosphorus which are low in saturated fat.

How to use?
Boil 2-3 sweet potatoes, put some salt and pepper on it. Include it in your diet to observe a significant difference in weight gain.

For Weight Gain in Children:-

Boiled and mashed sweet potatoes can be given to your baby.
One can also prepare sweet potato with milk, sweet potato khichdi, sweet potato pancakes, soups and halwa.
6. Cheese
If you are taking the cheese to gain some weight then you are on right track. Cheese is a pool of protein, calcium and fats. Casein a protein present in cheese is not easily digestible which causes weight gain. On the other hands, cheese is also helps in the strengthening of bones.

How to consume?
One can include cheese in your diet like cheese slices in sandwich, cheese spread.
Additionally, great the cheese and use it as toppings on salads or many baked items.
7. Dates
For weight gain dates also considered as accurate food choice. They are the rich source of protein, sugar, energy and vitamins hence quite good for gaining the weight.

How to use?
Consume the dates with milk daily.

Along with above home remedies for weight, stay happy, be positive.




125. Home Remedies for Yeast Infection
Yeast infection

Yeast infection is caused by many microorganisms, which reside inside the vagina of the females. It is often characterized by pain during urination or sexual intercourse, itching, burning sensation and white odorless vaginal discharge. The symptoms occur more likely during the week prior to the menstruation period. Yeast infections are extremely common during pregnancy.

There are Two Types of Yeast Infections:
Easily Occasionally treatable yeast infections
recurrent yeast infections
Effective Home Remedies for Yeast Infection
Stay loose and dry. Yeasts generally prefer moist atmosphere with little or no oxygen. To stop their growth, always wear cotton underwear, which is loose and breathable.
Insert 1-2 teaspoons of yogurt in the vagina to restore the balance between acid-bacteria. You can also eat yogurt to get cured.
Unsweetened cranberry juice is highly effective in fighting away the yeasts. It acidifies the vaginal secretions and makes them prepared to fight off the infection.
Garlic has antifungal properties. Eat fresh garlic cloves daily, either minced or plain. This also prevents yeast infections.
Prepare an herbal tea of rosemary. Dab in on the external surface. This helps to provide relief from burning sensation and itching.
Use a teaspoon of dried thyme for a cup of boiling water. Make the thyme tea. Drink 1 to 4 cups on a daily basis. It is highly effective to fight away the yeast infection.
Tips
 Maintain a good hygiene.
Wear cotton underwear.
Always wipe from front to back to prevent the spread of the microorganisms from the anal region.
 Avoid tight fitting jeans
 Change pads in every 6 hours
Decrease the consumption of sugar and caffeine
Decrease the consumption of sugar and caffeine
These are highly contagious. Do not pass it onto others.
These are some effective ways to treat and prevent the yeast infection. You can also carry out an at-home pH test to observe whether you are positive or negative on the yeast infection.

Follow the aforementioned home remedies and carry out the tips properly and lead a healthy and fit life !!
1. Yoga For Management of Anal Disorders
Anal disorders are painful conditions in the region near the anus and where it meets the rectum. Common anal disorders include hemorrhoids, fistula, fissures, etc. Symptoms include itching, pain, irritation, burning sensation, swelling, pus formation, painful and difficult defecation, etc. Anal disorders mostly originate due to faulty diet and lifestyle, while sometimes they could also occur as a side effect of medication or other body conditions. Most disorders of this kind respond well to restorative treatment and dietary modification. This article outlines an approach to management and prevention of all anal disorders by yoga and diet intervention.
Anal Disorders
Introduction
‘Anal disorders’ is a collective term for all disorders of the anus; where the waste leaves our body from. Discomfort in and around the anus is common, but it doesn’t mean that it is normal. Pain and itching could worsen over time and be a sign of other, more serious conditions.

The anal opening consists of many layers of skin and muscles that perform special functions of contraction and relaxation while, before and after movement of the bowels. Hence the anus is easily susceptible to trauma, from factors both internal and external to the body.

Disorders of The Anal And Perianal Region
The disorders originating in the anus or from the junction of the anus with the rectum can also cause discomfort in the superficial region around the anus, called the perianal region. Common disorders are:

Anal Itching : Itching can occur due to prolonged sitting on a rough surface, dryness, or irritants coming from the diet. It could also be a symptom of other disorders since all disorders start by itching and swelling.
Anal Fissure : A tear in the skin surrounding the anus that is not only painful but also worsens over time and may accumulate microbial growth.
Abscess and Fistula : A hollow space trapped between the muscles around the rectum and the anus, gets infected and filled with pus. This condition is called anal fistula and is often recurrent.
Anal Warts : Caused by a viral infection, anal warts are not only painful but also highly contagious. They should be removed or treated as soon as they are discovered.
Hemorrhoids/ Piles : The most common disorder which can even go unnoticed or ignored until it worsens to an extremely painful stage that requires surgery; hemorrhoids or piles is the name for swollen and inflamed nerves and blood vessels in the anal region.
Symptoms
There is some connection between all anal disorders, which is mixed symptoms. Some of many of the following symptoms may be felt by an individual suffering from a disease of the anus:

Itching
Redness : If redness is observed as a primary symptom
Swelling : Swelling definitely means that the anus needs some rest; and pressure should be lifted off it. It can signal that hemorrhoids are developing.
Burning sensation : It may also point towards improper digestion and absorption.
Soreness : Pain which is local; can signal towards many disorders.
Sharp pain : Sharp pain which feels like stool is hard; but it actually means that blood vessels have stiffened.
Bleeding : This sign should not be ignored; as it may even be coming from deeper inside the intestines.
Lumps / Acne : It signals towards anal warts or abscesses that are yet to pop up or develop fully.
Painful Defecation : It primarily originates from straining while moving bowels.
Causes
Following are the causes which should be considered:-

IBS : an inflammatory disorder where diarrhea and constipation can occur simultaneously.
Pregnancy : excess pressure on the anus and pushing during labour.
Straining during defecation.
Nutritional Deficiency: lack of fiber.
Diagnosis
Physical exam, Scans & Imaging can be used to detect severity and decide most appropriate treatment.

Yoga For Anal Disorders
A therapeutic healing programme can bring unexpected benefits for people with anal disorders. These exercises are great for beginning at any stage of any disorder; and are restorative as well as preventive. The practices that have the word ‘kriya’ in their name should not be done without supervision.

Vajrasana
It is an excellent practice to lift the pressure off of the anus. It can greatly relieve primary symptoms. It promotes healing of fistula, fissures and hemorrhoids.

Kneel on the floor or the mat/ carpet or even your bed.
Keep the knees together.
Bring the tips of the feet close and keep the heels slightly apart.
Place the buttocks on the soles of the feet with the heels forming a bowl like cavity for the hips.
Place your palms on the knees.
Your back and head should be straight yet relaxed.
Avoid using great force to straighten the back.
Close the eyes and relax the whole body.
Breathe normally. Practice for as long as comfortable. This exercise is famous as the only one that can be done immediately after meals.
Matsyasana
This pose relieves all tension built up in the hemorrhoids. It is specially recommended for anal fistula and warts.

Sit in Padmasana.
Relax the whole body.
Slowly, lie backwards, supporting the body with your arms and elbows.
Now curve the upper half of the spine backwards with an inhalation.
Hold the toes. The elbows stay on the mat.
The top of the head should ideally touch the mat perpendicularly.
This is the final position.
Resume normal breathing in the final position, and stay for a minute.
Remember not to strain any part of the body.
After some time, release the toes. Then relax the head, and then relieve the Padmasana.
Easy Preparatory Practice For Matsyasana :
Lie on your back.
The arms should rest on the sides.
This is the initial position.
Keeping the legs straight, lift the chest and shoulders up from the mat.
Inhale while doing so.
The top of the head should be resting on the mat.
If need be, use the palms to push the floor a little.
This is the final position.
Resume normal breathing.
Stay in the final position for 7-10 seconds.
This is one repetition.
Practice 3 repetitions.
Utthan Pristhasana
This shall ease all anal disorders since it is one of its kinds where the anus lies at the highest level in the whole body. It can be performed on a mat/ carpet/ grass.

Place both hands on the opposite shoulders.
Lie on the stomach.
Raise the head and gaze in the front. This is the initial position.
The elbows will remain fixed during the practice.
Raise the waist and the buttocks, so that the whole body is supported by the knees and elbows only.
You can place the chest and the chin on the ground.
This pose is similar to a transit position in Surya Namaskara.
Sarvangasana
This practice shall improve all disorders by restricting blood flow and healing bleeding piles.

Lie on your back.
The arms should be resting on both sides of the body.
Exhale fully.
Raise both the legs without bending them at the knees.
Support the buttocks and the back with your hands. The elbows should be resting on the mat.
Align the feet, the knees, the pelvis and the chest in a straight line perpendicular to the earth.
This is the final position. Resume normal breathing in the final position.
Practice three repetitions.
Care should be taken not to strain the neck.
Basti Kriya
This practice shall require special set up and guidance, but is extremely beneficial for people whose anal disorders are severely painful.

In ancient times, the practice used to be performed in a flowing river, but nowadays tubs can be used. This practice should essentially be learnt at a yogic treatment center and not just learnt.

Moola Shodhana Kriya
A soft root of a medicinal plant is used to insert into the anus and clean it. Modern suppositories are a form of the ancient Moola Shodhana kriya. This practice should also be done in expert supervision.

Other Tips
Consume a balanced diet.
Drink plenty of water.
Don’t keep sitting at hard surfaces, change poses if it is necessary for you to sit.
Do not ignore initial symptoms of anal disorders.
Conclusion
Anal disorders are preventable to a great degree by practicing hygiene and correcting one’s posture especially while working in a sitting for a long duration. The symptoms can be eased by various tips mentioned here in addition to following the yoga routine. It is recommended that these yoga practices be included in one’s lifestyle even if previous anal disorders are successfully treated. These are generally safe for everyone; however, people with multiple conditions should begin any routine under guidance and practice under supervision of an expert.




2. Yoga For Anemia
Anemia is the lack of red blood cells in the body. It is a condition of the cardiovascular or the circulatory system which makes it life threatening in extremely severe cases. Anemia is considered to be of many kinds depending on the factor causing it. It could go unnoticed for a long time if symptoms are ignored. Common symptoms are fatigue and a general lack of energy, which make it difficult to figure out in the initial stages. Practices from hatha yoga can help manage as well as prevent anemia. This article describes the types, symptoms, causes and risk factors, and yoga practices to manage and prevent anemia along with some recommended lifestyle and dietary modifications.
Introduction
A condition where the body doesn’t have enough red blood cells – either in quantity, or in quality, or both is called anemia. The red blood cells are crucial for not only the cardiovascular system which is vital for life but also for each and every cell of the body which is affected by every condition affecting the blood.

Anemia itself can be a symptom of other diseases. It could occur in the body due to different reasons, which is why we consider it to be of many types depending on its cause.

Types of Anemia And Their Causes
Iron Deficiency Anemia: this is the most common kind of anemia that originates primarily because of the deficiency of iron in one’s body. This deficiency comes from diet. Iron is responsible for the production of hemoglobin which carries out oxygenation of blood.
Vitamin Deficiency Anemia: the lack of vitamins B12 and C affects the blood health by decreasing the number of red blood cells in the body. It also occurs due to improper diet and can be easily managed with modification in diet and exercise.
Sickle Cell Anemia: it is a disorder of the red blood cells caused by their deformed shape which makes them unable to carry oxygenated blood in the body. These cells are weak and die easily after which there are not enough healthy red blood cells in the body. It can’t be cured but efforts can be done to improve total blood count of the red blood cells in the body.
Thalassemia: it is a genetic disease which causes a reduced level of hemoglobin in the blood. It could be managed with a balanced diet and exercise when mild.
Aplastic Anemia: it is a condition of the bone marrow which is responsible for the manufacture of new red blood cells. In Aplastic anemia the bone marrow is not able to produce sufficient new red blood cells. It can be life threatening.
Symptoms
Severe weakness and fatigue
Pale color of the skin
Short breath
Increased heart rate
Cold toes and fingers
Breakage of hair and nails
Loss of appetite
Dizziness
Muscle cramps
Confusion and difficulty understanding
Unintended weight loss
Dark color of urine
Skin rashes
Bleeding disorders
Pain in the chest or abdomen
Symptoms can be mild in the beginning which increases their chance to go unnoticed or ignored. Therefore no symptom should be ignored so that the possibility of life threatening conditions can be ruled out.

Risk Factors
Some factors decide the severity and susceptibility of a condition affecting a particular individual. Those factors are:

Pregnancy: pregnancy requires extra nutrition because the baby needs surplus blood and nutrition for proper growth.
Family History: some conditions like Thalassemia and Aplastic anemia can be genetic and pass from generation through generation.
Other Conditions: other deficiencies and especially eating disorders can also lead to anemia.
Poor Diet & Lifestyle: it could be habitual in developed communities and unavoidable in poorer communities.
Poor Intestine Function: digestion happens in the stomach but absorption happens in the intestine. If the intestines are not functioning properly there can be deficiency diseases.
Menstruation: menstruation causes loss of red blood cells which should be resolved by a balanced diet.
Diagnosis
A blood test known as complete blood count or CBC is usually enough for counting the number of each component of blood i.e. red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets, and other parameters.

Complications
Abnormalities during pregnancy
Severe fatigue and weakness
Heart diseases
Sickle cell anemia and Aplastic anemia can cause death.
Yoga For Managing Anemia
Anuloma Viloma Pranayama
Alternate Nostril Breathing: It is recommended for purification of the blood channels. During the beginning of Pranayama, breathing should be deep and relaxed.

Sit on the mat with the back straight and the spine relaxed.
The wrists should rest on the knees, with no strain in the elbows or the shoulders.
Close your eyes gently.
Place the index finger of any hand on the forehead and the middle finger either with the index finger or suspended.
Place the thumb tip on one nostril. Inhale with the other nostril.
Exhale with the same nostril.
Place the ring finger on this nostril and release the other nostril held by the thumb.
Inhale deeply and exhale with the same nostril.
Practice ten respirations.
This is one round. Practice three rounds in the beginning.
Bhramari Pranayama
The Humming Bee Practice: it improves overall blood circulation and drainage.

Sit with your legs crossed.
The spine and the back should be straight and relaxed.
Close your eyes gently.
Gently plug both the ears with the thumbs of both hands.
Put the fingers on each eye.
Inhale deeply, and with exhalation, make a deep humming sound like a bee.
Practice thrice.
Savasana
The Corpse Pose: It is an excellent relaxation asana. This pose could also be practiced in bed.

Lie on the bed/ mat/ blanket.
The whole body should be relaxed.
Arms should rest on both sides of the body.
Close your eyes gently.
Breathe normally, inhaling deeply and exhaling fully.
Open your eyes when guided.
Take a side turn and get up from the mat or go to sleep as preferred.
Lifestyle/Dietary Tips
Adapting a lifestyle that cuts out the physical factors contributing to worsening of any condition multiplies the benefits of a yoga routine by several times. The following tips are extremely beneficial for everyone with any or all symptoms of a disorder relating to the circulatory system:

Consume enough Vitamin K: It is recommended to consume vitamin K everyday for healthy blood composition. It is found in leafy greens, whole cereals.
Consume enough Vitamin D: It is essential for the musculoskeletal system (which contains the bone marrow). It is found in mushrooms, egg yolk, fatty fish, etc.
Consume enough Vitamin C: Vitamin C supports formation and repair of blood vessels. It is found in citrus fruits, berries, Brussels sprouts, etc.
Consume more Iron-Rich food: Improves the Blood composition. It is found in soybean, dried fruits, nuts and seeds, etc.
Consume enough Vitamin B-12: It supports blood formation and prevents vitamin deficiency anemia. It can be found in meat, fish, milk, cheese, mushrooms, etc.
Consume enough Vitamin B-9: It promotes cell growth in the blood. It is found in leafy greens, beans, seeds and nuts, whole grains, seafood, etc.
Avoid packed, processed and preserved foods. They have lesser nutritional value than fresh food, and contain unhealthy amounts of fat, salt and sugar.
Consume less fried and heavy food, especially if it has been cooked commercially.
Eat more home-cooked food. The food made commercially has a lot of ingredients to enhance the taste, which decreases its nutritional value.
Eat more fresh fruits, vegetables, and nuts. They will fulfill all your requirements of minerals and vitamins.
Electrolytes: consume electrolyte-enriched drinks especially in summer, like lemonade, coconut water, etc.
Ghee: Ghee extracted from cow’s milk is an excellent tonic for the blood. It should be eaten around 1 teaspoon at a time with rice, pulao, dals, khichari, etc.
Conclusion
Anemia can improve with a combination of diet and yoga especially when it is discovered when it is still mild. Although it may seem that yoga practices can only benefit physical ailments, it is actually true that yoga can have surprising benefits for blood disorders. The practices described here are generally safe for everyone. However, pregnant women and people with multiple conditions should seek guidance from a competent yoga therapist so that they can benefit from these practices. Dietary recommendations described above should strictly be followed for preventing loss of red blood cells while the condition improves.



3. Yoga & Ayurveda for Arthritis Management
Arthritis is the term used for all kinds of joint pain. Depending on the cause, arthritis is classified as degenerative, metabolic and autoimmune. Genes play an important role in arthritis running in families. There is no permanent treatment for arthritis; only pain relieving medications are used. Yoga practices specifically meant for loosening tension built up in the joints have been described in this article followed by dietary modifications and conclusion.

Yoga Tips For Arthritis

Introduction
Joints are points in our skeletal system where two or more bones are connected together with a mechanism that allows movement. They are lubricated by membranes that keep the bone surfaces smooth. A torn membrane, an inflamed one or that which has uric acid in it becomes painful and causes the condition we call arthritis.

Types Of Arthritis
Arthritis is given many names depending on its cause and symptoms. When they have joint pain, maximum people are suffering from one of the following conditions:

1. Osteoarthritis
It is degenerative i.e. age-related wearing out of the joints. It can occur sooner if the person doesn’t get enough nutrition for the bones and also if they are overweight. The lubricating layer between joints is exhausted in osteoarthritis, causing pain. It is the most common form of arthritis.

2. Rheumatoid Arthritis
Rheumatoid means relating to the musculoskeletal and the immune system. This is a disorder where joints are inflamed on their own and are more severely painful than osteoarthritis.

3. Gout
Uric acid is created as a by-product of some metabolic processes in our body. Most of it is passed in urine, but it sometimes crystallizes i.e. becomes solid and deposits at some joints. This causes swollen and painful joints. It mostly occurs in toes and wrists. This condition is called gout.

Symptoms Of Arthritis
Although painful joints are the first and most significant sign of arthritis, there are a few more symptoms which should not be ignored:

Swelling
Difficult movement of a body part
Stiffness around a joint
Inability to straighten a joint once bent
Causes
Hyperuricemia: High uric acid in the blood causes crystal stones to form and deposit at various places in the body.
Immune disorders: Sometimes the immune system goes crazy and employs white blood cells at the joints.
Aging: With age the joints also degenerate like the rest of our body does. They become loose and painful.
Obesity: Extra weight of the body puts extra pressure on the joints especially those in the legs and the back. This causes early wearing out of joints and the protective membranes around it.
Genetic factors: if any of the above factors caused arthritis in your parents or grandparents, you are even more likely to develop this condition.
Risk Factors
Women are more likely to get osteoarthritis. On the other hand, men are more likely to develop gouts. Rheumatoid arthritis is observed to have no such preference.

Treatment
Treatment includes medications. Over the counter as well as prescription drugs are used for easing arthritis. Pain-relieving medications are either consumed orally or applied as an ointment. A correlation has been seen in these medications and hypertension.

Yoga For Arthritis Management
Yoga is not always about difficult poses. Here are very minute exercises from ancient yoga texts, specially created for circulating energy in all the joints. These are safe for everyone and can be practiced by the young and the elders alike.

Toe bending: Toes of both the feet are bent away from and towards the body.
Ankle rotation: The ankles are supported by both hands and then rotated in clockwise and anti-clockwise direction.
Knee contraction: The kneecap is pulled towards the body by shrinking the thigh muscles.
Knee bending: holding the thigh with both hands, knees are one at a time bent and relaxed.
Knee crank: The leg is held by both hands and circles are made with knees.
Half butterfly: Keeping one leg straight, the other is bent and the knee is moved up and down supported by both hands.
Hip rotation: The leg is rotated at the hip joint, supported by both hands.
Full butterfly: Both the legs are bent at the knees in a seated position. The soles are joined together and the toes held by hands. Then the knees are moved up and down. This motion can also be supported by both hands.
Fist clench: The fingers and the palms are joined and separated as if a fist is being formed.
Wrist bending: The hands are moved up and down at the wrists.
Wrist rotation: The fists are closed and the wrist joint is rotated in full circles.
Elbow bend: The elbow joints are closed and relaxed.
Elbow rotation: The elbow tips are used to make imaginary circles.
Shoulder rotation: The elbows are bent and the hands are kept on the shoulders. Now the shoulder blades are contracted and relaxed so that full circles are formed by the bent arms.
Neck rotation: The neck is moved from side to side and then rotated in all directions first clockwise and then anti-clockwise.
All these exercises should be done in the same sequence. At least ten repetitions of each should be done, keeping the rest of the body relaxed. The base position for all exercises shall be sitting. These can be done many times a day.

Dietary Tips
In addition to practicing the above yoga exercises, a few dietary modifications should be made in order to keep joint pain at its minimum:

Consume
Water: drink around 6-8 glasses of water in a day to prevent and ease inflammation. Water also flushes excess uric acid from the blood.
Herbal tea: Tea made with flowers and herbs ease inflammation of the joints.
Spices: Spices such as carom, cumin and asafetida are excellent for removing joint pain.
Nuts & seeds: Almonds, sesame seeds and mustard seeds should be consumed as whole and oil.
Fruits: Fruits especially citrus fruits are great for easing joint pain.
Milk: Milk should be consumed to keep balance of macronutrients in the diet since we are going to restrict some protein sources from the diet.
Avoid
Beans: Beans aggravate arthritis; examples are edamame, green beans, drumsticks, etc.
Legumes: Peas, black eyed bean, kidney bean, etc. should also be avoided.
Cruciferous vegetables: Cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli, Brussels sprouts etc. are not recommended.
Alcohol: Alcohol worsens all kinds or arthritis.
Meat & fish: They are not recommended since they contain chemicals that produce excess uric acid in the body.
Conclusion
Arthritis is very common especially in adults and the elderly, but there is not much awareness about it. It can be prevented as well as eased with the yoga practices mentioned here. Also, the dietary modifications should be strictly followed since they are based on ayurvedic principles. These practices should be followed as family routines since arthritis tends to pass on through generations. Arthritis is manageable, if not treatable.




4. Yoga For Depression
Depression is a group of medical conditions affecting the overall well being of an individual. Depression starts as a mental discomfort resulting from lifestyle stressors. It can go unnoticed and unrecognized especially in communities where mental health is not considered a component of overall health and where general health conditions are ignored. Individuals with depression respond extremely well to therapy and lifestyle changes. This article throws light on how to deal with depression with the help of yoga.
Yoga Tips For Depression
Introduction
Depression is not just one disorder but a combination of many prolonged conditions affecting the energy and enthusiasm of an individual in almost every sphere of their life. Although their mood keeps fluctuating, it is yet mostly overpowered by sadness and grief. Events that cause trauma and stress are especially responsible for bringing about depression in people’s lives. Depression is a prolonged condition and not an episodic one. It may go unnoticed or ignored in the initial or even later stages especially when the person having it doesn’t have help around them.

Symptoms
Symptoms of depression may or may not be apparent. However, the following should be considered:

Constant bad mood
Changed sleep pattern
Sleep and wake timings opposite to the society/ family
Changed daily routine
Avoidance of gatherings
One feels worthless
Feeling guilty for everything
Over thinking
Inability to make important decisions
Inability to understand and think clearly
Lack of enthusiasm and willingness
Changed eating habits
Suicidal thoughts
Avoiding company
Avoiding conversations
Anxiety and chronic stress
Lack of positivity
Extreme mood swings in females
Alcoholism
Substance abuse
Sudden aggression in behavior
Poor performance at work or school
Causes And Risk Factors
Various factors contribute to the development of any condition in an individual. Those could originate from one’s lifestyle or routine, or be triggered by their anatomical and physiological constitution. Some factors decide the severity and susceptibility of a condition affecting a particular individual. On this basis we see causes of a disease as lifestyle factors, physical factors or risk factors.

Stress
Over thinking
Negative thoughts
Major change in life such as having a baby
Criticism from society
Lack of self acceptance
Lack of self confidence
Over Consciousness
Lack of motivation in life
Loss of loved one
Emotional insecurities
Loss of job
Financial insecurities
Certain medications that worsen brain health
Broken marriages
Diagnosis
Usually a verbal consultation is enough for diagnosing depression.

Complications
If the signs and symptoms are ignored, it can complicate one’s condition. Depression can turn into suicidal behavior. It can also aggravate other unrelated conditions such as metabolic disorders i.e. diabetes, thyroid, etc.

Treatment
Conventionally, antidepressant drugs are used to improve symptoms but they never subside completely, and they recur and worsen in most cases, especially if the person quits or reduces medication. Such medications are strong and have side effects such as unintended weight loss, nausea, disturbed bowels, abnormal blood glucose levels, and most importantly, damaged reproductive health. Therefore it is recommended a programme that has no side effects.

Yoga For Managing Depression
Yoga is a safe set of practices that benefit not just the physical but also the mental health of an individual in many ways. The following practices are recommended for people with any symptoms of depression:

Anuloma Viloma Pranayama
alternate nostril breathing: It is an easy but effective pranayama. It is an excellent practice to prepare for the next practices. It should preferably be performed outdoors.

Sit with the legs crossed.
Close the eyes gently.
The back should be straight and relaxed.
The wrists should rest on the knees in the default position.
Put the index finger and the ring finger of the right hand on the forehead on top of the nose.
Use the thumb to close the right nostril.
Inhale with the left nostril.
Close the left nostril with the ring finger.
Exhale with the right nostril.
Inhale with the right nostril and close it with the thumb.
Exhale with the left nostril.
Practice ten respirations in this way.
This is one round. Practice three rounds.
Bhramari Pranayama
The humming bee practice: it improves the overall functioning of the nervous system.

Sit with the legs crossed.
The spine and the back should be straight and relaxed.
Close the eyes gently.
Gently plug both the ears with the thumbs of both hands.
Put the fingers on each eye.
Inhale deeply, and with exhalation, make a deep humming sound like a bee.
Practice thrice.
Shavasana
The corpse pose: recommended after asana practice, this pose is used to multiply the benefits of all practices. It is a relaxation exercise. It can be performed on a mat or on the bed.

Lie on the back with a relaxed body.
Arms should rest on both sides in a neutral position.
Maintain the natural curve of the back.
The spine should be relaxed at all times.
Breathe deeply.
Keep observing the body’s processes.
Get up after some time or go to sleep.
Shavasana can be followed by meditation which should strictly be performed under physician supervision of a therapist because depression may make unpleasant events intense in people with even mild depression.

Lifestyle/Dietary Tips
Adapting a lifestyle that cuts out the physical factors contributing to worsening of any condition multiplies the benefits of a yoga routine by several times. The following tips are extremely beneficial for everyone with any or all symptoms of a disorder relating to the mind.

Meditate.
Communicate with your friends or family.
Eat a balanced diet fulfilling all requirements.
Consume natural stress relieving teas such as lavender chamomile and Tulsi.
Consume fresh foods and avoid stale ones.
Consume healthy fats found in nuts and seeds.
Pick up hobbies and join classes for them.
Learn new languages.
Serve or volunteer at an animal shelter if you like animals.
Conclusion
Depression is recognizable in early stages by signs such as if an otherwise talkative and extroverted person suddenly starts avoiding company. It should be noted that the person who is getting depressed doesn’t himself convey about his condition, it is the duty of the people around such a person to take care and note behavioral changes. We should all take mental health more seriously so that no one is ashamed of sharing their problems and seeking help and support. The practices described here are generally safe for everyone. However, pregnant women and people with multiple conditions should seek guidance from a competent yoga therapist so that they can benefit from meditation.




5. Yoga For Diarrhea
Diarrhea is the term given to loose and watery stools that are passed few to several times a day. Diarrhea doesn’t only bring discomfort but also causes loss of water, nutrients and minerals from the body. Depending on the number of days it lasts, diarrhea can be acute or chronic. Acute as well as chronic diarrhea can lead to serious complications in different ways – acute diarrhea signals towards a dietary intolerance or a microbial infection upon resolving which, the digestion becomes normal again; while chronic diarrhea can damage the whole lower gastrointestinal tract in the long run. Diarrhea is manageable at home. Dietary tips and yoga practices for non-medicinal treatment of diarrhea have been discussed in this article.
Introduction
Diarrhea, characterized by frequent loose stools or loose motions, is a condition of the lower half of the gastrointestinal tract. Usually it lasts less than a week and resolves on its own. The body loses some nutrients and minerals along with the water that is eliminated with the stools. Therefore diarrhea needs attention even at its onset, since ignoring it can make it last for longer; and also it can lead to an undiagnosed infection worsened by dehydration as well as loss of nutrients and electrolytes. Depending upon the history of the individual and the duration for which symptoms last, diarrhea can be acute or chronic.

Acute Diarrhea
Diarrhea that is caused by external agents such as dietary intolerance, allergy, food poisoning, or a microbial infection, subsides as soon as the unwanted/ allergic food substance or the microbe exits the body. It is therefore called acute diarrhea and typically lasts for less than a week.

Chronic Diarrhea
Diarrhea that is caused by an underlying condition such as irritable bowel syndrome or chronic acidity (known as gastro esophageal reflux disease or GERD) often stays for long or even forever. It can also recur i.e. come and go on its own. In this case it is called chronic and needs the root disorder to be rectified.

Yoga Tips For Diarrhea
Mechanism of Diarrhea
Food once mixed with digestive juices in the stomach is stirred and mixed by the stomach for at least two hours for a medium sized meal. It is then passed on to the small intestine so that it can absorb nutrients, minerals and water from the slurry of digested food. It is the function of the small intestine to take as much time as needed and extract all nutrients, minerals and water from the food. It usually takes the small intestine four hours to absorb the needed components and then send the remaining paste to the colon i.e. the large intestine. The large intestine may take anywhere from 6 to 12 hours to completely separate and eliminate the waste after digestion and absorption has been performed.

If the intestinal muscles discard the slurry of digested food sooner than normal and without absorbing all the useful components, the resultant stool is watery. It is not eliminated all at once but requires frequent visits to the toilet. This is called diarrhea.

Symptoms
Diarrhea is only characterized by loose and watery stools with frequent removal of the stools. The abdomen may also feel bloated. Diarrhea itself can be a symptom of many other acute conditions such as infections or allergies.

Causes
The cause of diarrhea decides if it is going to be chronic or acute. It could be physical i.e. originating from within one’s body, or lifestyle-related i.e. coming from an external source.

Lifestyle Factors
Swimming in public pools: it may surprise you but every drop of pool water hosts many kinds of bacteria that can make the swimmers sick with diarrhea for upto five weeks! Diseases like cryptosporidiosis and cholera are spread through water and diarrhea is the first sign of being infected with water-borne illnesses.
Microbial infections: Microbes including bacteria and viruses may enter the body via street food, stream or spring water, or droplets from another person’s mouth. They are not accepted by the body and it starts its immune mechanism to flush out the microbes. This flushing is done by means of diarrhea and vomiting.
Substance abuse: some drugs and medications prescribed to minimize withdrawals of drugs greatly affect the working of your gut. Diarrhea is often a part of withdrawal symptoms originating from when someone is quitting a drug.
Laxative overdose: people with constipation who rely on laxatives and women who have just delivered might be taking stool softeners may sometimes find their stools more watery than usual. It happens when the dose has been taken even while it wasn’t anymore required.
Food poisoning: stale and rancid food also has microbial growth in it. This food if consumed is not accepted by the body and is discarded fast without absorption. This kind of diarrhea is a protective measure of the body’s immune system.
Vaccination: vaccines that contain live cultures may also cause diarrhea along with slight fever, nausea and body ache. It happens only at the first dose and is resolved within three to four days of getting the dose.
Physical Factors
IBS: irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a condition in which a person may get diarrhea and constipation on alternate days or even simultaneously. This is a condition of the mental state where nervousness and fear triggers strong or weak intestinal movements.
GER and GERD medications: medications prescribed for gastro esophageal reflux or acid reflux; make the stomach empty faster than normal and it disturbs the flora of the intestines. The result is an incompletely digested and poorly absorbed stool.
Lactose intolerance: Some individuals cannot digest milk and milk products because of the presence of lactose (a kind of glucose) in them. On consumption of dairy, they face diarrhea which resolves within a day or two.
Wheat allergy: some people also have intolerance towards wheat and wheat products on consuming which they pass loose stools.
Menstruation: the uterine muscles contract in order to discard its lining. The uterus is fitted close to the intestines and sometimes the intestinal movements are disturbed by uterine movements. This is the reason why some women have an episode or two of diarrhea at the onset of menstruation.
Pregnancy: Pregnancy hormones can be crazy and bring constipation, diarrhea, vomiting and what not – all at once! It resolves in the later months or after delivery.
Complications
Diarrhea is not complicated in itself but it causes serious loss of water and nutrients especially if it doesn’t resolve for more than a week.

Nutritional deficiency: the intestines empty faster in diarrhea. It doesn’t give them the time required to absorb nutrients and minerals from food. It causes a lack of especially those nutrients that are water soluble and are required by the body every day, for example: vitamin C, folic acid, thiamine, niacin, riboflavin, etc.
Dehydration: water loss is a prominent condition correlated with diarrhea. Important minerals such as sodium, potassium, zinc, magnesium etc. are also lost along with water in diarrhea.
Yoga Practices For Diarrhea
Yoga is not just preventive but also healing. A few of the exercises that target the intestines and regulate their movement are recommended during diarrhea:

1. Halasana
‘The plough pose’: this is an inverted pose, but not an advanced one. It inverts the lower GIT. It prevents downward movement of the bowels, hence allowing more time for absorption. It should be practiced on a folded blanket, a thick mat or carpet, or on a bed that’s not bouncy.

Lie on your back.
The arms should rest on the sides of the body.
Push the floor with the palms and lift both legs up.
Maintain the natural curve of the back while lifting the legs.
The knees shouldn’t bend.
Move the legs further in the same direction until they rest on the mat behind your head.
Exhale while doing so.
Support the back with the palms.
This is the final position.
Resume normal breathing in the final position.
Stay in the final position for at least 10 seconds.
2. Sarvangasana
‘The all-organ pose’: this pose benefits the whole body. This is an inverted pose, and is advanced too. If one is unable to perform Sarvangasana, similar benefits for diarrhea can be achieved from Halasana only. This pose also requires a thick mat or carpet, or a folded blanket.

Lie on your back.
The arms should be resting on both sides of the body.
Exhale fully.
Raise both the legs without bending them at the knees.
Support the buttocks and the back with your hands. The elbows should be resting on the mat.
Align the feet, the knees, the pelvis and the chest in a straight line perpendicular to the earth.
This is the final position. Resume normal breathing in the final position.
Practice three repetitions.
Care should be taken not to strain the neck.
3. Shavasana
‘The corpse pose’: this pose is the greatest of all because of the relaxation it brings. One lies like a dead person but observes their body processes without moving. It restores peace and stability. Specifically for digestive disorders, it restores the natural state of all body organs and physiological processes. It can be done anywhere: on grass, on the bed, on a mat/ carpet etc. Shavasana should better be performed with guidance of an expert.

Lie on your back.
The arms should lie on both sides of the body.
Close both the eyes gently.
The back should be relaxed.
The natural curve of the spine should be maintained.
The palms and the fingers should be in a neutral position.
There should be no strain in any body part.
Breathe deeply with the help of abdominal muscles.
Go to sleep or wake up after some time.
Dietary Tips
The body responds to yoga practices very fast, especially when the person is making efforts by changing their diet during ongoing illness. One should keep in mind the following points for when they or someone in their house has got a diarrhea:

Do
Drink enough water: water loss should be replenished at regular intervals to avoid dehydration.
Drink electrolytes: electrolytes make hydration easier. Electrolytes are sodium, potassium, etc. found in salt, coconut water, banana, etc.
Eat fresh yogurt: fresh yogurt has a property of binding loose stools.
Eat bananas: bananas are excellent for the gut.
Eat more fiber: fiber absorbs water in the bowel and makes the stool thick and soft.
Eat light meals: small and light meals consisting of dal & rice should be given. Tapioca is also a light meal.
Don’t
Drink milk: Milk has the tendency to loosen stools. It should be avoided during diarrhea.
Eat spices and seasonings: diarrhea stools contain partly digested food which brings pungency to it. They hurt the anus and the skin around it.
Eat packed & processed food: packed and processed food has preservatives and unhealthy fats. It should be avoided at least until diarrhea has been treated.
Eat pickles: the gut loses its protective lining of mucus after some watery stools. Pickles hurt the lining from the inside.
Eat bloating foods: diarrhea can also be accompanied by bloating i.e. puffiness, as long as diarrhea doesn’t resolve, bloating foods like cabbages and beans should be avoided.
Drink sodas: sodas i.e. aerated drinks may be tempting especially when you have an upset gut, but they should ideally be avoided because they cause dehydration. Same is the case with coffee.
Conclusion
Diarrhea is mostly acute but that doesn’t mean it doesn’t need attention. Immediate home treatment of diarrhea should be begun because it causes loss of fluids and electrolytes from the body which can be dramatic and result in severe dehydration. It is essential yet easy to manage diarrhea at home while taking care that it subsides within three to four days. Treatment without medical intervention is harmless but needs proper rest and time to complete. Yoga practices listed above not only regulate intestinal absorption but also induce relaxation. They should compulsorily be supported by the dietary tips mentioned.




6. Best Yoga & Eating Habits For Children That Will Help in Long Term Health
Children require optimum nutrition and physical activity during their growing years and the dietary requirements of children keep changing as they grow. Children spend their time playing around but this can be transformed into a healthier and more wholesome practice by making children practice yoga at a young age. It can bring surprising benefits and changes in their personality. This article explains the need for healthy eating and yoga for children of all ages. General as well as specific tips have been given on diet and yoga recommended for children.
Best Yoga For Children
Introduction
Children need proper nutrition and routine but they can’t be forced to follow it. The diet and routine they are following now is going to affect their body, its structure and function, and their health throughout their lives. Their bodies will stop growing in their early twenties and then there will be little scope for making the deepest levels of their body i.e. cells and tissues healthier and stronger. Children may not understand it now because they may want to eat what their classmates or friends at play school are eating. They can easily be influenced by ads on the TV and be attracted to chocolates, cookies and milk additives. It is our duty as parents and also collectively as a society that we instill healthy routine and eating habits in children by making sure they understand its importance, and not imposing our thoughts and understanding on the kids.

Importance of Healthy Eating For Children
A healthy and balanced diet ensures that the children will get all the nutrients required by their bodies for growth and development, in the required amounts. Children may get nutritional deficiencies very easily because their bodies consume nutrients very fast, especially from ages 1-18. Any normal diet we eat and give to our children may easily fulfill the requirement of macronutrients i.e. carbohydrates, fats, protein and fiber, but it becomes tricky to include and balance all required micronutrients i.e. vitamins and minerals. Children are in utter need of micronutrients because specific vitamins and minerals are required by the body in the development of all systems.

Special Requirements of Babies, Infants & Toddlers (0-4 years)
Vitamin D and calcium are required for proper growth of the muscular and skeletal systems. The musculoskeletal systems form a major part of the body and house other organs and organ systems in place. Musculoskeletal growth entirely depends on proper intake of vitamin D and calcium. Vitamin D is extremely important for the development of normal immune function in children.
Iron is important for the whole body because its presence in the red blood cells is responsible for proper circulation of oxygen and nutrients in the body. Oxygen is required by every cell of the body for carrying out metabolism at cellular level. Iron is responsible for the development of cognitive function in the brain.
DHA or docosa hexaenoic acid is an extremely important fatty acid of the form omega -3 for growth of brain, understanding and communication in children. It is important for fetal brain development; therefore it is recommended for pregnant women and young kids.
Special Requirements of Children & Pre-Teens (5-12 years)
The age of 5 to 12 is extremely crucial for the growth and development of children both physically and mentally. During this time they learn how to behave at different places and how to express themselves in front of a few people.

Protein is required by kids and pre-teens in moderate amounts for metabolism, growth, better immunity, proper circulation of water, nutrients and oxygen, and waste removal. Children can get enough protein from milk, vegetables, beans and lentils.
Good quality carbohydrates are required by children and pre teens so that they are provided with enough energy to study, play, talk, etc. Instead of sugar, pasta, cake etc., the carbohydrates in your child’s diet should come from potatoes, mangoes, bananas, whole grain cereals and rice.
Good quality fats are required by children, meaning that fats that come from milk, butter, coconut, nuts and seeds, avocados, yogurt, cheese, etc.
Iron and folate, necessary for blood health and brain function, should be consumed in enough quantities by children. Iron and Folate can be found in whole grains, lentils and pulses, vegetables such as spinach, kale and asparagus, Brussels sprouts, and some fortified foods.
Enough fiber should be given to children because it encourages proper elimination of bowels and wastes. Children are developing toilet habits in the age 3-5, and they should be able to feel their poop properly.
Vitamins A, B, C, D, E and K are required by children for proper development of the eyes, the skin, the teeth, gums and bones. All vitamins can be eaten by eating enough mixed portions of frets and vegetables.
Special Requirements of Teens (13-18 years)
Teens are now changing hormonally and physically at a fast rate at this time. They actually need more elaborate macronutrients so that their physical growth is not compromised or hindered.
Teens require more protein than they ever ate earlier. Protein builds muscles. Do not assume that muscles are only the biceps and triceps, actually all organs are made of some or the other kind of muscles. Good quality protein is required which has all the amino acids in them, such as lean meats, soy products such as tofu, edamame, soy milk and tempeh, nuts and nut butters, and eggs.
Teens require more energy-giving foods. Carbohydrates that come from whole grains such as brown rice, whole wheat, beans, pulses and fruits, are required and should be eaten instead of refined grain products such as noodles, breads, pasta, cakes and cookies.
Calcium rich foods are essential for teens because they are now growing in height and this will stay in their body forever. Good sources of calcium are low fat dairy products and plant based milks.
Teens should stay away from fried and highly processed foods because that’s what they want to eat and it is not good for their body, because these foods are high in calorific value but low in nutrition. They also have additives, preservatives and artificial flavors which are extremely bad for growth and development.
Fruits and vegetables should be consumed daily to fulfill the need of vitamins and minerals and also to cut back on sodas, processed juices and desserts.
Do not restrict teens from hanging out with friends or eating out, or consuming alcohol. Rather, explain to them what effect these activities have on their health.
Benefits of Yoga for Children (of all ages)
Yoga has many components that can be used as an exercise as well as for therapeutic purposes. On that behalf, different yoga practices are recommended for different individuals; yoga is beneficial for everyone. But it can be especially beneficial for children and teens, let us understand how.

Yoga develops love, compassion, empathy, truthfulness, cleanliness and thankfulness in children.
Yoga makes children learn self discipline.
It makes children less likely to pick up fights and hurt other kids.
Yoga postures develop balance. The child learns to balance its body in various poses, and feels like having accomplished a skill.
Coordination between various body parts is established and improved with regular yoga practice.
Learning yoga under yoga therapists can help children with disabilities.
Yoga improves a child’s focus, attention and concentration.
Yoga provides similar benefits as dance, martial arts and aerobics in children.
Yoga makes children aware of proper breathing.
Children who practice yoga are more confident than those who don’t.
Yoga helps children learn about and observe their body closely.
Yoga establishes a deeper connection between mental and physical processes of the child.
Children with special needs can benefit greatly from yoga.
Children who start practicing yoga at a young age are less likely to be depressed or stressed in future.
Yoga practice can prevent development of diseases in children, even those with a family history of certain diseases.
Yoga establishes a greater and deeper relation between parents and children.
Yoga For Children
Surya Namaskara is such an exercise that is a complete package and suitable for everyone except for people with multiple conditions. It can make children more energetic and strong. No other exercises are required or recommended for children.

Yoga For Teens
Teens should do physical activities for more than an hour every day. These exercises should be such that they promote healthy growth instead of just reducing body mass. Besides yoga, teens should also join swimming, cycling, running, playing team sports like basketball, cricket and football, etc. In addition to Surya Namaskara, teens can benefit the most from a series of Tadasana, tiryaka Tadasana, Adho Mukha Svanasana, Marjari Asana, Dhanurasana and Setu Bandhasana.

How To Develop These Habits in Children
It can be difficult to develop healthy eating habits in children. Children think that parents are just taking away their favorite foods from them, or are just asking them to do yoga because they have the authority over them. Children may not suddenly understand the importance of a healthy, balanced diet, such as a home cooked meal. However, the following tips may be beneficial in developing healthy lifestyle habits in children:

Practice yourself. If you only tell your family to practice yoga or eat healthy, while you don’t do so, it is impossible that they will develop healthy habits.
Eat and cook together as a family.
Practice yoga together.
Involve your child’s friends in yoga sessions.
Give your children healthy snacks as part of these yoga sessions.
Avoid distractions of the TV or the movies during meal times.
Do not punish children if they don’t listen to you.
Ask your child’s school for help. Sometimes children listen to their teachers while they may not listen to you.
Give your child cool accessories for joining yoga.
Educate your child about how poor eating and lack of activity can affect their health.
Do not argue with your children about their habits. Rather, teach them acceptance and responsibility.
Tell your children that their body is their responsibility and it’s upto them to take care of it and maintain it.
Conclusion
We learn the importance of healthy eating and Yoga after we become adults and have developed some symptoms of physical weaknesses or some diseases that have developed due to our poor diet and lifestyle especially when we were teens. It isn’t easy to control what and how teens eat and do but healthy eating and love for yoga can be developed in them from a young age. It is recommended that children be gradually made interested and involved in a healthy lifestyle consisting of wholesome foods and yoga.




7. Yoga For The Management of Endometriosis
Endometriosis is a painful condition where the tissues that the uterus is lined with, starts growing outside the uterus at sites like the fallopian tubes, the ovaries, and the inner lining of the pelvis. It causes cyst formation, extremely painful menstruation and sexual intercourse. If it blocks any passages of the reproductive system, conception becomes difficult, posing a risk of infertility. Conventionally the treatment of endometriosis includes symptom suppression by pain relieving medications or surgery. Fortunately endometriosis responds well towards therapeutic yoga practices. This article describes endometriosis and its mechanism along with effective yoga practices that are recommended for easing endometriosis.
Introduction
Endometrium is the name of the layer of tissue that lines the inside of the uterus. Therefore endometriosis is a condition of the uterine tissue when it grows in or transports to sites out of the uterus. These sites are usually the fallopian tubes. Endometriosis may be very painful for some women. The abnormally grown tissues may obstruct or even block passages within the reproductive organs which can complicate its normal physiology.

Yoga Tips For Endometriosis
Symptoms
External growth or endometrial tissue may or may not always be painful. Sometimes women discover endometriosis when they visit their doctor for getting treatment for infertility. However, the condition can produce some or many of the following symptoms in a woman:

Painful menstruation, with intense cramping or stabbing pain
Painful intercourse, where pain may occur during or after the intercourse
Heavy menstruation, where bleeding is heavy and for more number of days
Painful urination, which can feel like crunching pain inside the pelvis
Difficulty conceiving, even with no use of birth control
Weakness and fatigue, caused by heavy bleeding and disturbed hormones
Bloating and changed bowel pattern, which may feel like prolonged premenstrual symptoms including simultaneous diarrhea and constipation
Painful bowel movement, where the pain is only internal and bowel movement may feel like forced yet incomplete evacuation
Causes
Exact cause of endometriosis is not known. However, the following factors are thought to be responsible for development of the condition:

Menstrual blood may have travelled upwards into the reproductive glands.
Excess estrogen could cause endometriosis during the onset of puberty.
Endometrial cells could have been transported to other places by circulation.
The immune system could be faulty and contribute to endometriosis by not killing endometrial cells.
During a surgery for delivery or removal of any reproductive organs the endometrial cells could have been attached to external sites.
Risk Factors
Some women may be more likely to develop endometriosis than the others, this susceptibility is found more in:

Those who have never delivered a child
Those who have an early menarche and a late menopause
Those whose period lasts for more than five days
Those with a family history of endometriosis
Those with birth defects in the reproductive tract
High secretion of estrogen
Those with restricted menstrual blood flow
Diagnosis
Endometriosis is diagnosed by either a physical exam, where the doctor feels the inside of the reproductive tract with their hands; or a scan using ultrasonic waves, or endoscopy, where a small camera is used to view the inside of the reproductive organs.

Complications
Infertility: if the endometrial tissue has grown at such a place where it either: blocks the way of the ova, or prevents them from uniting with the sperms, or prevents the sperms from entering the uterus altogether, the chances of fertilization are very less.

Ovarian cancer: cells or tissue dormant inside the reproductive tract at odd places can develop into malignant cysts and even cancer.

Treatment
Conventional treatment includes pain relieving medications and sometimes hormone replacement therapy. However, endometriosis responds positively to yoga and dietary modification.

Yoga For Managing Endometriosis
A yoga routine can ease symptoms and even prevent worsening of the condition. It could also regulate bleeding since bleeding occurs at various sites in endometriosis. These exercises are recommended for individuals with any degree of endometriosis as these are safe. However, women who have other conditions should seek guidance from a yoga therapist as they may modify this routine as per the individual’s needs.

1. Paschimottanasana
The forward seated bend: It is an excellent exercise for correcting the disorders of the reproductive system.

Sit on the mat/ carpet with legs extended in front of you.
Keep the spine straight and relaxed.
Inhale while raising the arms upwards.
Bend forwards until the arms touch the toes. If possible, hold the toes.
Exhale while doing so.
Keep the spine relaxed and touch the knees with your nose.
This is the final position. Do not inhale in the final position.
Release the toes. Start inhaling and bring your back to the initial position.
This is one repetition. Perform twenty repetitions with at least 5 second stay in the final position.
2. Setubandhasana
The bridge pose: it is an excellent exercise, specially prescribed for all uterine disorders.

Lie on your back with arms resting on the sides
Keep the palms on the floor/ mat/ carpet.
Bend both the knees and bring the heels close to the hips, the heels still resting on the mat.
Raise the pelvis off the mat, pushing the mat with the heels and the palms.
The line joining the neck and the knees should be straight.
This is the final position.
Exhale while reaching the final position.
Resume normal breathing in the final position.
Stay in the final position for upto 20 seconds.
This is one round. Practice upto ten rounds.
3. Marjari Asana
Pose of the cat: it is a dynamic pose involving two movements, one where one’s back is curved up and then down. This exercise restores reproductive health by regulating hormone secretion. It is highly recommended for women of all ages.

Stand on all fours, with the knees and the palms placed firmly on the floor/ mat/ carpet.
Keep the elbows and the knees relaxed.
Inhale and drop the back to make it a downward curve. Face should be forwards.
Exhale and form an upward curve with the back. The face should be down and the chin should reach close to the chest.
Repeat each position ten times at a fast pace.
Relax the neck and the back.
This is one round. Perform three rounds. If rest is required, lift the palms off the mat between rounds.
4. Shashankasana
The pose of the hare: Shashankasana is a relaxation asana as well as a strengthening one. Hence it is safe as well as recommended to adapt this posture while on one’s period to assist uterine contractions and also ease pain generated by them.

Sit on a mat/ carpet or your bed by kneeling. The hips should rest on the feet.
Inhale while raising your arms straight up.
Start bending forward with the arms still extended.
Exhale, and keep leaning forward until your face touches the bed/mat.
Let the arms rest on the floor/bed.
This is the final position. Keep eyes closed and breathe normally in the final position. This is one repetition.
5. Surya Namaskara
The Sun salutation: this practice is great for regulating hormone imbalances of the whole body, especially in teenagers. Women can start surya Namaskara after 2-3 months of delivery. It can be practiced at the beginning or the end of this routine, as per the individual’s liking. Twelve rounds should be practiced.

Stand with the feet default width apart, equally sharing the weight of the body.
Namaskarasana: Join the palms in Namaste in front of the heart.
Hastottanasana: Raise both the hands and stretch the arms backwards. The upper back and shoulders also tilt backwards with an inhalation.
Bring the arms to the front.
Hastapadasana: Bend forwards and place the palms on the ground. Touch the knees with the forehead with an exhalation. From this position the palms shall remain fixed at their places unless specified.
Ashva Sanchalanasana: Glide the right foot backwards until the leg is completely stretched. The left leg remains perpendicular to the ground but bent at the knee. The spine is stretched back.
Stretch the left leg backwards and place the feet together.
Adho Mukha Shav asana: The torso and the legs should make an acute angle with each other, with the buttocks as the vertex. Do so with exhalation.
Ashtanga Namaskara: Bring the chest and the head down to the ground with the buttocks still up. The breath remains suspended in this step. The body touches the ground at eight points: the palms, the forehead, the chest, the knees and the feet. Thus it is called Ashtanga Namaskara. It activates dormant energy in the navel.
Bhujangasana: bring the buttocks down and place the abdomen on the ground. With a deep inhalation, stretch the spine backwards with the head bent at its maximum.
Adhomukha Shvanasana: raise the midsection up again forming a triangle like shape with the upper body, the lower body and the ground as three sides.
Ashva Sanchalanasana: bring the right leg forwards and put the foot in line with the palms.
Hastapadasana: bringing the left foot forward, put both feet together with the face touching the knees.
Hastottanasana: bring up the torso and stretch backwards with a deep inhalation, the arms reaching back.
Namaskarasana: with an exhalation join both the palms in a Namaste. Surya Namaskara is complete.
The routine should be performed on an empty stomach in the morning or at a gap of at least three hours after a medium sized meal in the evening.

Lifestyle/Dietary Tips
Adapting a lifestyle that cuts out the physical factors contributing to worsening of any condition multiplies the benefits of a yoga routine by several times. The following tips are extremely beneficial for everyone with any or all symptoms of a disorder relating to the reproductive system.

Maintain a healthy body mass.
Be aware of what ingredients your food has.
Choose freshly cooked food over packaged one, and opt for minimum processing. Processed food hampers metabolism and endocrine function.
Engage in satisfaction as well as relaxing activities. These shall be more beneficial in managing stress and ultimately build the required mindset for dealing with disorders, especially those which get worse with psychological disturbances.
Also, make physical activity a lifestyle. The best form of activity is yoga practices which would not only keep one active and burn energy, but also targets specific organs of the body which require attention.
Conclusion
Endometriosis may or may not be painful. Women who practice a balanced lifestyle in terms of diet and physical activity experience less severe symptoms and are unlikely to develop complications. Yoga exercises can be an excellent form of physical activity. The practices described here are safe for everyone. Since yoga heals an organ system as a whole and not just one symptom or disorder, these exercises can also be done as a regular program for maintaining reproductive health and preventing diseases in general. Women with multiple conditions should begin a yoga regime after due consultation with a competent yoga therapist.





8. Yoga For Eye Health
Eyes are one of the ‘special’ sense organs in the body; which means that the eyes are irreplaceable in the body and their function cannot be performed by any other organ. The eyes are located on the head which means they are not covered by clothing or any protective layers. This, along with their intricate structure and nerve and blood supply makes them susceptible to various discomforts and diseases which can be mild and temporary to serious and permanent. In this article, in addition to a brief introduction to the structure and the function of the human eye, we shall discuss common problems of the eye with an emphasis on which disorders can be prevented and managed at home without medical intervention; with yoga practices that generally suit all individuals.
Introduction
Every organ in the body serves at least one important purpose in the body, the purpose could be anatomical (structural) or physiological (functional).  However, some organs are considered vital, which means they are essential for the body to survive; for example, the heart and the lungs. Then there are non-vital organs, which perform important functions but the body can manage without them; for example, the reproductive organs and the limbs. Some organs perform special functions of sensing occurrences around us and send information about them to the brain. They are called special senses and help us sense pleasant as well as dangerous components around our body. The eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue and the skin are considered special senses with the first four located within the head, close to the brain.

Yoga Tips For Eye Health
Eye: Structure And Function
The eyes are located symmetrically in the front of the skull with a major part of their structure enclosed within a spherical cavity. The eyes receive a dedicated nerve supply with mainly sensory and motor functions. These nerves are crucial in the functioning of the eye since the motor nerves regulate eye movement and the sensory nerves transmit visual signals to the brain for processing. The eye receives a profound blood supply by branches of the artery.  The eye is made up of a lens held in place by the ciliary muscle, dividing the whole eye into anterior and posterior parts. The anterior (or front) part consists of the iris, the cornea, the pupil and the conjunctiva; and the posterior (or back) part consists of the retina, the macula and the aqueous humor connected with the optic nerve and the blood vessels.

The lens is a muscular form of the converging glass lenses we use for studying optics and in daily objects like a laser light, a microscope, a magnifying glass, a camera, etc. It focuses the light rays incident on it, on to the retina.
The ciliary muscle’s function is to facilitate adaptation and adjustment of the eye lens as the need be. It is a part of the ciliary body, which also secretes a jelly called the aqueous humor.
The iris is the muscle that facilitates the adjustment of the pupil; it is also responsible for providing a specific color to our eye lens.
The pupil is the small black circle in the center of the eye that increases or decreases in diameter with an increase of or decrease in the ambient light around us. It acts like the door of the eye which decides how much light shall enter; it expands when it’s dark around the viewer and contracts when it is bright.
The cornea is like a covering of the eye lens; any light entering the eye is the first incident on the cornea and any injury like a rough rub affects the cornea first.
The conjunctiva is a thin membrane that protects the eye from injury and foreign particles. It also lubricates the eye and prevents it from drying.
The retina is the screen at the back of the eye where pixel images are formed after proper convergence done by the lens. In a healthy eye the retina lies at the focus of the eye lens.
The macula holds special cells that perform the function of reception of raw visual signals in a form differentiable on the basis of shape and color.
The aqueous humor is a jelly that perfectly fits the inside of the eye. Its function is to maintain the shape and tension in the eye.
The optic nerve transmits the pixel signals received from the eye to the concerned part of the brain where they can be integrated and processed into a whole image.
Common Eye Disorders And Their Causes
Stye, blurred vision, dry eye, defected vision, one eye functioning better than the other one, watery and irritated eye, redness and hot sensations, etc. are common problems with the eyes, and can be treated or at least managed well at home. Conditions like cataract, glaucoma, diabetic neuropathy, and retinal detachment, etc. are however, more serious and require medical intervention. Eye disorders can be enlisted systematically by grouping them with the part of the eye they affect.

The lens: the lens can get unclear i.e. develop opacity. This condition is called cataract and requires attention.
The ciliary muscle: the muscle’s inability to contract and relax decides the focusing power of the eye lens. Hence the ciliary muscle has a great role to play in correct vision.
The iris: mild inflammation and irritation, as well as blindness can be caused by a faulty or injured iris.
The cornea: vision defects such as astigmatism, hypermetropia (inability to clearly see near objects) and myopia (inability to clearly see far objects), are common problems of the cornea.
The pupil: overly dilated pupils, asymmetrical pupils of both eyes and birth defects are related to the pupil.
The conjunctiva: rubbing or abrasion, pain, watery eyes, dry eyes and irritation are related to the conjunctiva.
The retina: blurred vision and development of blind spots occur in the retina. The retina can also be detached in a diabetic person’s eye.
The aqueous humor: since the aqueous humor maintains pressure inside the eyeball (intraocular pressure), increased or decreased pressure can lead to vision defects and also glaucoma.
The macula: macular degeneration; which is mostly age-related and involves gradual loss of vision.
The optic nerve: inflammation of optic nerve can cause temporary or permanent vision loss in one or both eyes. Glaucoma is caused by a fault in the optic nerve.
The blood vessels: if the blood vessels don’t deliver proper oxygen to the eyes, can cause partial or complete vision loss. High blood pressure damages the optic blood vessels and affects eye health badly.
Other Factors
Besides the physical factors that cause the eye disorders to originate, some environmental factors worsen eye health and contribute to development of diseased conditions and poor functioning of the eye. They are:

 Poor lighting: a significant difference in the ambient light and the light falling on or emitted by something you’re using requires frequent adjustment in the anterior part of the eye, and it can trouble the eyes.
 Long exposure to digital screens: digital screens like those of the TV, smartphones, computers or tablets are backlit i.e. they throw light on our eyes from the background of the screen. Using these devices for long is a harmful practice since it strains the eyes and also causes dryness and irritation.
 Nutritional deficiency: micronutrients like zinc, vitamin A, carotenes and carotenoids, high quality fats, vitamin C, and vitamin E make a great difference in eye function and performance.
 Overall muscle weakness: a general weakness in the muscles of an individual’s body makes them more susceptible to developing eye disorders sooner or later in life; especially vision defects which can be multiple and simultaneous.
 Degenerative changes: with age, our cells and tissues get used up and are not as efficient as they were when we were younger. Aging brings vision defects and lack of muscle tone.
Yoga Practices For Eye Health
It is possible to ease strain, fatigue, tension, dryness and regulate blood circulation in the eye muscles by following some techniques that have been tested by yogis and used by people over the years for preventing eye disorders.

Palming: generation of warmth with both palms followed by application of this warmth to the eyes is done first of all to relax the eyes and prepare them for the next exercises. It is especially recommended during eyelid inflammation and styes.
Blinking: blinking the eyes fast for some seconds further removes tension built up in the motor nerves of the eye.
Side Viewing: moving the eyes to the extreme left and right without moving the neck not only strengthens eye muscles but also removes squint.
Side And Forward Viewing: looking interchangeably at points located in the front of the head and at the side improves central and side vision.
Up-down Viewing: looking at points at the extreme top and bottom of the visible space without moving the neck strengthens muscles connected to the bottom and top of the back of the retina, respectively.
Circular Viewing: rotating the eyes in a circular and opposite motion improves coordination of the sensory and motor nerves of the eye.
Nose Tip Gazing: fixing the eyes at the tip of the nose greatly improves vision and strengthens eye muscles. It is however an intense practice and exercises 5.1 – 5.6 should compulsorily be performed before this one.
Focus Shifting: viewing a closely placed object such as a pen or one’s own thumb and then shifting the focus to what is lying at the farthest in the background; improves focusing power of the eye and corrected defective vision.
Trataka Kriya: it is a cleansing practice that not only improves performance of lachrymal glands that lubricate the eye but also improves focus. This practice has great spiritual benefits since one can start getting visuals that are not visible to an ordinary person. Trataka is also used to enter into meditation.
Special Note:
If a regular yoga regime is started involving the whole body; people with severe eye diseases such as glaucoma should not perform bending positions for long duration as it can build up pressure in the eye.

Lifestyle & Dietary Tips
Some tips can greatly improve eye health and slow down degeneration of the eye muscles. These should be followed by everyone regardless of their health (or disease) condition.

 Consume a diet balanced in all respects, i.e. sufficient micronutrients and macronutrients should be consumed as per daily requirement of an individual.
Take care to maintain proper distance from the object in use during activities like book reading, digital screen reading, watching the TV, etc.
Prescription glasses should be used only during the activity that requires them; reading glasses should be put off when you’re not reading.
Break should be taken from continuous digital screen use.
Eyes should be washed with clean water a few times a day.
Eye makeup should be used less often and care should be taken to remove it with more natural products.
Eye makeup should not be shared.
Protect the eyes from dust, excess Sun and pollutants by wearing sunglasses.
Conclusion
The eyes have a detailed structure which makes them susceptible to a variety of disorders. Some of them are more serious, which can be prevented, while the others are mild and can be managed well with self care and a few practices backed by yoga. These practices are generally safe and recommended for every individual regardless of their age and medical history. The practices that mention ‘kriya’ in their name should be first learnt from a competent yoga therapist before being practiced independently at home. It should be noted that neither diet nor exercise alone can benefit an individual as much as a combination of both diet and lifestyle can do. Thus a balanced lifestyle should be followed by everyone.





9. Yoga For Fatty Liver Disease
Abnormal level of fat accumulated in the liver is a cause of concern and is known as fatty liver disease. The liver is the organ designated to deal with fat metabolism in the body. It utilizes dietary fat for manufacturing cholesterol which in turn serves many essential functions in the body. Liver itself doesn’t store too much fat or cholesterol. If it does, this condition is a marker of disease and should be managed with lifestyle modification and yoga intervention. This article contains such management methods that are not only effective in restoring liver health but are also preventive of all liver disorders.
Introduction
The liver is an organ assisting the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) and is placed at the right of the body near the stomach. It is quite big in size and its functions include filtering all contents entering and exiting the GIT, producing bile and maintaining cholesterol level. The liver under normal circumstances doesn’t store much fat. Accumulation of fat in the liver is a sign of liver diseases building up. These diseases are collectively called fatty liver disease and are of the following kinds:

Alcoholic or non-alcoholic
Inflammatory or non-inflammatory
Pregnancy-related
Yoga Tips For Fatty Liver Disease
Symptoms
A diseased liver may produce few or many of the following symptoms:

Enlarged liver: the liver may be enlarged due to fat accumulation so much that it could even be felt by touching the abdomen.
Pain in the abdomen: the liver itself or the tissues surrounding it may be painful.
Yellow tint in skin, eyes, nails, etc.: the liver produces an important enzyme called bile which is tinted yellow due to the presence of bilirubin in it. In individuals with liver diseases, bile is overproduced and the excess bilirubin makes the eyes, the nails and the overall appearance of the skin yellowish.
High blood cholesterol: the liver deals with cholesterol metabolism which is essential for each cell of the body. An unhealthy level of total cholesterol is a sign that the liver is diseased or about to get diseased.
Visible blood vessels: accumulation of excess load of cholesterol in blood cells causes them to reflect blue shades through the skin. The blood vessels hence appear darker through the skin.
Swollen veins and lymph nodes: improper circulation of lipoproteins and inefficient removal of waste causes overloaded and swollen blood vessels and lymph nodes.
Weakness and fatigue: since the liver takes an active part in all kinds of metabolism in the body, improper functioning of the liver causes weakness and fatigue in the individual.
Lack of appetite: poor metabolism causes food aversion and lack of secretion of primary digestive enzymes in the mouth; hence the person may not feel like eating.
Unintended weight loss: lack of appetite results in decreased body mass which wasn’t carried out on purpose.
Reduced energy level and enthusiasm: overall weakness, fatigue, reduced appetite and unintended weight loss all cause the person to be less productive and enthusiastic.
Causes
Although fatty liver disease is simply thought to be caused by accumulation of fat in the liver, various other factors contribute to this accumulation reaching abnormal and dangerous levels. They are:

Obesity, the accumulation of unhealthy body fat contributing to total body mass.
Diabetes, the body’s inability to process dietary sugar.
Unhealthy levels of total cholesterol, especially triglycerides.
Other metabolic disorders, such as thyroid disorders.
Risk Factors
Some causes also serve as risk factors i.e. any condition is likely to affect some individuals more severely than others. Such factors are:

Family history, where the parents, uncle, aunt or a grandparent had liver diseases.
Pregnancy, which involves dramatic changes in normal bodily processes.
Infectious diseases of the liver, such as various forms of hepatitis.
Alcoholism, causing impaired digestion and absorption due to excessively long gastric emptying time.
Steroidal medications like those prescribed for autoimmune or rheumatoid arthritis.
Metabolic disorders including diabetes, obesity, thyroid malfunction and high cholesterol.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of a fatty liver includes:

Physical examination: the doctor may first touch and feel the approximate location of the liver to check for any pain or enlargement.
Blood tests measuring liver enzymes and cholesterol levels.
Scanning by the use of x-rays, magnetic resonance imaging, or computed tomography.
Biopsy, the examination of a tissue extracted from the liver with a thin needle to check for scarring and fibrosis.
Complications
If unrecognized or left untreated, fatty liver diseases of all kinds can lead to liver failure which is a life threatening condition.

Yoga for the management of Fatty Liver Disease
The following practices are recommended in a sequence as laid out below for restoring liver health. Also, all exercises require to be done on an empty stomach, or at a gap of at least 3 hours after a medium-sized meal.

1. Veerasana
Also known as the hero’s pose, this asana prepares the liver for the next exercises in the sequence. It is itself an efficient exercise for people with severe liver damage. It can be practiced on a mat/ blanket/ carpet/ bed etc.

Sit with both the legs extended forwards.
Fold the right leg and place its heel under the buttocks.
Bend the left leg at the knee and place it heel on the mat besides the right knee.
Bend the left elbow and place it on the left knee.
Place the left hand below the chin. Let the face rest on it.
Place the right palm on the right knee.
This is the final position. Breathing should be normal.
Practice for upto 30 minutes after having meals. Change the sides in between if required.
2. Bhujangasana
Also known as the cobra pose, this asana also puts gentle pressure on the liver and aids its functioning. It should be done on a mat/ carpet/ folded blanket or a thin mattress.

Lie on your stomach.
Let the arms rest on both sides of the body.
Bring the hands parallel to your chest, palms facing down.
Lift the head up, and bend the spine backwards with the stomach resting on the mat.
Support the body with the palms sharing weight. Keep the elbows slightly bent.
Inhale while doing so.
This is the final position.
Stay in the final position for 5-10 seconds.
3. Dhanurasana
Also known as the bow pose, this asana stimulates metabolism in the liver itself hence relieving fatty liver diseases of all kinds. It can also be practiced on a mat/ blanket/ carpet/ bed etc.

Lie on the stomach with the arms resting on both sides of the body.
The legs should be relaxed and so should be the head.
Hold the ankles of both the legs with respective hands by bending the knees.
This is the initial position.
Lift the ankles, bending the legs backwards but straightening the knees at the same time.
Simultaneously, raise the head and lift the torso upwards. Do so with a full and deep inhalation.
Feel the kidneys being massaged and pressed against by the ground.
This is the final position. No part of the body should be strained.
Stay in this position for a few seconds. Resume normal breathing.
Bring the torso to the initial position first and then lower the legs.
Perform thrice.
4. Saral Dhanurasana
Also known as easy bow pose, this asana is recommended for those who cannot perform the complete Dhanurasana since this is an easier version providing almost the same benefits. This can also be done as a preparatory practice for full Dhanurasana. It can also be practiced on a mat/ blanket/ carpet/ bed etc.

Lie on the stomach with the arms resting on both sides of the body.
The legs should be relaxed and so should be the head.
Hold the ankles of both the legs with respective hands by bending the knees.
This is the initial position.
With an inhalation raise the head and bend the upper body backwards.
The knees and the thighs may rest on the ground.
This is the final position.
Resume normal breathing, and stay in this position for a few seconds.
Practice five times.
5. Ardha Matsyendrasana
Named after sage Matsyendra, this asana provides a twist to the GIT and improves blood circulation and cellular metabolism in the digestive organs. It can be done on a mat/ carpet/ bed or grass.

Sit on the mat with both the legs extended in front of the body.
Keep the back straight.
Keeping its heel on the mat, bend the left leg at the knee.
Keep the right leg straight.
Place your right hand on the left ankle.
Place the left hand behind you on the back.
Move the chin close to the left shoulder.
Exhale while doing so.
This is the final position.
Stay in this position for 10 seconds.
Resume normal breathing.
Rotate the neck back to the default position.
Lift the hands from their positions and straighten the leg.
Now, bend the right leg.
Place the left hand on the right ankle.
Place the right hand behind you.
Move the chin close to the right shoulder.
Exhale while doing so.
Resume normal breathing and stay in the final position for 10 seconds.
Rotate the neck back to the default position.
Lift the hands from their positions and twist back as in the initial position.
Lifestyle/ Dietary Tips
Include more physical activity in your routine.
Eat less packed & processed foods.
Eat more raw and fresh fruits and vegetables.
Eat only healthy fats such as olives, avocados, nuts & seeds.
Avoid alcohol.
Practice hygiene.
Limit restaurant and street food.
Consume the required quantity of macronutrients every day.
Avoid fried food.
Avoid added sugar.
Conclusion
The liver is essential for life, and it shouldn’t be taken for granted. Alcohol, smoking and drug abuse adversely affect liver health. A nutrition deficient diet is also responsible for degraded liver health. Therefore dietary modifications and yoga practices specifically healing the liver can effectively manage liver diseases especially unless it is critically severe. Since yoga works on a region of a body at a time and not just one organ, many systems are simultaneously targeted and worked upon by a yoga practice. Therefore, these practices are extremely beneficial for metabolic disorders in the upper half of the GIT since yoga routine cures the imbalances in all organs that lie in close proximity to each other.




10. Manage Fibromyalgia With Yoga
Fibromyalgia is a condition characterized by overall body pain which makes it often feel like cramps or arthritis. It is rather a disorder of the soft tissues found throughout the body. Soft tissues work as intermediate paddings between various organs and other tissues. The cause of fibromyalgia is not clearly known; it is thought that the problem lies in how the body responds to environmental and physical factors causing exhaustion and pain. Fibromyalgia is a chronic condition and responds well to therapy. Yoga practices that can strengthen the nervous system’s pain-processing section besides healing the soft tissues, are discussed in this article.
Introduction
Myalgia is the term for pain and tenderness in a muscle. Fibromyalgia is therefore an inflammatory condition of the fibrous connective tissues of the body. It is essentially prevalent in the body wherever there are connective tissues. In fibromyalgia, it is not the pain itself that makes the person so uneasy, but it is the fact that fibromyalgia feels more painful than it actually is, for example, a woman having developed fibromyalgia may complain that her menstrual cramps have recently intensified to unbearable limits. It is thought that the pain processing mechanism of the body is disturbed in fibromyalgia.

Yoga Tips For Fibromyalgia
Pain-sensing Mechanism of Our Body
The spinal cord is a part of the central nervous system i.e. it originates from the base of the brain and acts as the conveyor of all stimuli and the body’s response to them. It has a network of nerves originating through it and reaching the farthest ends of the body for communication of sensing and action as the need be. The nerves form the peripheral nervous system. The communication through various parts of the nervous system occurs in a way similar to how electric signals are transported via wires. Therefore messages of the nervous system are also called signals. The spinal cord is protected and enclosed within the vertebral column. However, the nerves are not protected and sometimes get pinched i.e. pressed and closed between the joints of the vertebral column. This gives rise to many painful conditions of 7 the body that appear to the individual as several times more painful than they actually are. It is also said that fibromyalgia is not painful itself but it is the condition of the amplification of pain signals.

Symptoms
Fibromyalgia can cause or intensify the following sensations in the body:

Widely located pain: the whole body or a major part of the body may seem painful.
Fatigue: the person may feel too tired even for day to day activities requiring no great effort.
Facial pain: painful chewing, or other movements such as brushing the teeth, combing hair, applying makeup, etc.
Leg pain that worsens at night: the legs may feel extremely restless and painful especially when the body is at rest.
Extreme sensation of temperature changes: even when there is a small change in the temperature of the environment or ambient temperature of one’s house or office, a person with fibromyalgia may sense it and respond to it.
Reduced brain performance: the brain’s ability to understand and process information reduces in case of any nervous disorder.
Dizziness & confusion: dizziness and confusion are also the signs of a fatigued brain.
Lack of energy and enthusiasm: the person’s physical and mental discomforts may combine to result in an overall reduced energy and enthusiasm to do things or even live life.
Feeling of dissatisfaction: intense feelings of ‘low’ can also contribute to the person ending up feeling dissatisfied with life or their own performance.
Causes
The causes contributing to any disease could be physical or lifestyle-related, but in case of fibromyalgia the causes are somewhere between physical and mental.

Confused central nervous system: the central nervous system is not able to process signals properly.
Mental trauma that came with an injury: when incidents such as road accidents or medical mishappenings combine with grief, fibromyalgia can find a cure in the individual.
Risk Factors
There are no risk factors as such, but a person with other disorders of the nervous system is more susceptible to developing fibromyalgia.

Diagnosis
There is no standardized test for detection of fibromyalgia. A competent therapist shall use behavioral assessment and arrive at a therapeutic plan for you just after asking you a few questions.

Modern Treatment
A definitive treatment plan doesn’t exist for fibromyalgia. Rest is advised along with the physical therapies such as acupuncture, acupressure, chiropractic therapy, etc. During the course of these therapies, pain relieving medications are sometimes used.

Yoga For Easing Fibromyalgia
We should remember that fibromyalgia is less of a disease and more of a mental condition. Therefore an integrated approach is required which is capable of healing the mind and the body together. The following routine should be practiced, starting with some asanas and progressing on towards Pranayama and relaxation meditation.

1. Trikonasana: known as the triangle pose, this pose enhances blood circulation and prepares the body for the effects of exercises 4 and 5.
Stand with the legs wide apart. Raise both arms at the sides of the body parallel to the ground.
Bend forwards and touch the right foot with the left hand. The torso shall rotate accordingly.
Perform on the other side similarly.
Perform 10 rounds.
2. Vyaghrasana: Known as the tiger pose, this is a dynamic exercise. This shall balance the chemical and physical processes of both the cerebral hemispheres.
Stand on all fours i.e. kneel and place the palms on the floor.
Keep the elbows and the knees relaxed but firm.
Inhale and drop the back to make it a downward curve. Face should be upright.
Now extend the left arm and the right leg straight and parallel to the ground.
Exhale and form an upward curve with the back. The face should be down and the chin close to the neck.
Extend the right arm and the left leg parallel to the ground.
Repeat each position ten times.
Relax the neck and the back.
Lift the palms from the mat.
Perform thirty rounds.
3. Padmasana: Padmasana has been used by yogis since ages to enhance the functioning of the central nervous system.
Sit with the legs outstretched.
Place the right foot on the left thigh and place the left foot on the right thigh.
Keep the spine straight and the whole body relaxed.
Keep breathing deeply and normally.
Sit in this pose for as long as you would like to.
4. Natarajasana: named after lord Shiva, the king of all the dancers, this is an advanced pose and is extremely beneficial for balancing the nervous and physical equilibrium. It is beneficial for all mental disorders.
Stand with the feet equally sharing the weight of the body.
Hold the right big toe with the right hand.
Raise the left arm in front of the body.
Simultaneously, pull the toes of the right foot with the right hand.
Balance the whole body on the left leg.
Stay in this position for at least 10 seconds.
Release and perform on the other side.
It may take some time to balance the whole body on one leg, but it can be perfected with practice.
5. Anuloma Viloma Pranayama: a subtle practice, meant for improving the overall nervous performance.
Sit with the legs crossed.
Close the eyes gently.
The back should be straight and relaxed.
The wrists should rest on the knees in default position.
Put the index finger and the ring finger of the right hand on the forehead on top of the nose.
Use the thumb to close the right nostril.
Inhale with the left nostril.
Close the left nostril with the ring finger.
Exhale with the right nostril.
Inhale with the right nostril and close it with the thumb.
Exhale with the left nostril.
Practice ten respirations in this way.
This is one round. Practice three rounds.
6. Bhramari Pranayama: This humming bee practice stimulates normal and healthy functioning of the brain and the spinal cord. It is a great practice for entering meditation.
Sit with the legs crossed.
The spine and the back should be straight and relaxed.
Close the eyes gently.
Gently plug both the ears with the thumbs of both hands.
Put the fingers on each eye.
Inhale deeply, and with exhalation, make a deep humming sound like a bee.
Practice thrice
7. Yogic Nidra: A relaxation meditation, the Yoga Nidra is also known as ‘yogic sleep’ where the body is reenergized as it is in actual sleep, in much less time. It is actually more beneficial than an actual sleep. It should be guided for non-adepts. It is done by first practicing Shavasana.
Lie down in Shavasana.
Start by moving the attention towards the feet. After a few seconds, move the attention up through the legs, the pelvis, the back, the abdomen, the arms, the thorax, the neck, to the head.
Observe the whole body.
Breathing should be regular and relaxed.
When guided, wake up and end the session.
✓ Yoga Nidra relaxes the whole body.
✓ It rejuvenates the mind and relieves stress.
✓ It treats all chronic physical and mental disorders.

Sometimes, when the condition of an individual doesn’t allow them to perform any other yoga practices such as asana or Pranayama, Yoga Nidra is the only safe and feasible treatment for a patient.

Lifestyle/Dietary Tips
In addition to the above routine, just three tips should be followed to enhance the effects of the yoga practices:

Tea: A tea of herbs that are specifically known as brain tonics such as Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri) and Sankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis) should be consumed.
Ayurvedic diet: a diet that is Sattvic and prescribed as ideal for one’s ayurvedic body type should be eaten.
High quality fats: high quality fats found in nuts and seeds such as sunflower seeds, almonds, walnuts, flax seeds, olives and sesame seeds etc. should be made a part of daily diet.
Conclusion
The nervous system plays the most important role in how our body deals with situations. It is therefore necessary for the management of fibromyalgia that the signal processing of the central nervous system be rectified. The yoga practices described here act on the central nervous system via symmetrically balanced movements of the body. Practice should be begun upon consultation with a competent yoga therapist. Symptoms shall take some time to improve, and all changes should be communicated to the therapist so that they can modify the routine as felt right for the condition of the individual and at pace with the improvement in the symptoms. Fibromyalgia is manageable.





11. Yoga For GERD
GERD, short for gastro esophageal reflux disease, is a chronic condition where the lid of the stomach i.e. the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) is unable to hold the mixture of undigested food and digestive juices in the stomach. Due to the inability of the LES to perform its function, the gastric contents make their way upwards into the esophagus and at times even to the mouth. This repeated reflux damages the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) i.e. the lid of the stomach, making the reflux recurrent. People with GERD often opt for surgical correction of the damaged LES. Non-invasive management of GERD with yoga intervention is discussed in this article.
Introduction
Gastro esophageal reflux disease, meaning a prolonged and persistent upward flow of gastric contents into the esophageal region, is a chronic condition of acid reflux and heartburn.

‘Gastric contents’ includes chewed solid and liquid food together with digestive juice which is a mixture of mostly hydrochloric acid, some water, salts and minerals, proteins, pepsin and mucus. It is acidic in nature and that’s how it is supposed to be – in order to convert all the food into a form usable by the human body. Gastro esophageal reflux (GER) becomes a disease (GERD) when the first two sphincters of the digestive tract are damaged due to ignored and untreated acidity over many years.

Yoga Tips For GERD
The Esophageal Sphincters
The esophagus or the food pipe is the tube that delivers chewed food from the mouth to the stomach. At the places where it is connected with the mouth and the stomach, there are bands made of special muscles that can tighten up and loosen according to requirement. These junctions are called sphincters. There are many sphincters in the digestive tract, placed at locations that separate different stages of digestion. The sphincter at the junction of the throat and the esophagus is called the upper esophageal sphincter (UES) and that at the junction of the stomach with the esophagus is called the lower esophageal sphincter (LES). The LES has a major role to play during digestion. A faulty LES is responsible for stomach reflux and regurgitation. A normal LES is highly toned at rest.

Symptoms
GERD is serious and it means that its symptoms were ignored when they were still mild and manageable. It has all the symptoms of acid reflux in severe and aggravated form.

Acidity: mild reflux or sour burps point towards one’s possibility of developing GERD in the future. It can be well managed when initially mild.
Belching and regurgitation: when food enters the stomach it replaces some volume of air that comes up and exits our mouth. We call it burp. Burping is natural and normal. When the sphincters lose their tone this burping becomes frequent, abnormal and loud, often bringing with it parts of gastric contents.
Heartburn: heartburn is called so because of the intense burning sensation that the acid reflux produces close to the heart.
Chronic diarrhea: GERD brings with it constantly loose stools that may irritate the skin surrounding the anus while exiting through it.
Faster GIT transit: when digestion and absorption is faster than normal or other individuals, the food takes lesser time to exit the gastrointestinal tract and it causes frequent and faster bowel movements.
Eye disorders: People who have a history of acid reflux also have irritable eyes. They don’t have weakened eyesight until they are old but they are greatly troubled by sunlight.
Causes
Acidity: acidity is a mild and initial form of GERD. Acidity is therefore also called GER. When there have been too many refluxes running again and again over the LES, it loses its tone.
Damaged LES & UES: the LES and the UES may even become permanently damaged due to frequent acid refluxes.
Pregnancy: pregnancy brings a wave of hormones that alter many physiological processes in the pregnant woman’s body. The most chaotic of them is the hormone relaxin which relaxes and dilates smooth muscles in the body. The sphincters are made of smooth muscles. This is why a new pregnant woman may start having acidity, and if she already has it, it is worsened by pregnancy hormones.
Obesity: in most cases of obesity, visceral fat is dangerously high. Visceral fat is the deposit of fat surrounding the digestive tract. It puts excess pressure on the digestive organs, causing the already weak sphincters to loosen further under pressure, hence worsening GERD.
Previous surgery: many people who have had one surgery of the LES have to get it done again.
Treatment
The most common medications taken at home for acid reflux are antacids. They are alkaline in nature and are consumed to neutralize stomach acid. They are useful for instant relief but don’t treat GERD.

Other medicines that are used and sold on prescription only are H2 blockers, and Proton-Pump Inhibitors (PPIs). They interfere with the body’s physiology since both of them work by reducing the amount of stomach acid secreted, and have side effects such as irritable bowel syndrome, nausea, etc.

Yoga practices for GERD
Yoga is safe for everyone and restores the body’s natural physiology without interfering with any process. The following practices are especially effective in minimizing GERD. When practiced for long term as a lifestyle, they may also treat GERD.

1. Vajrasana
‘The thunderbolt pose’: limits the blood circulation in the legs so as to concentrate it in the digestive organs. It is also popular since it is the only practice that can be done immediately after having meals. The Japanese also adapt this pose while having their meals. They call it ‘seiza’ meaning proper pose for sitting. It can be practiced on bed, mat, floor, carpet, low-seated chairs, etc.

Sit with the legs spread forwards.
Fold one leg and place its heel under the buttocks.
Fold the other leg and place its heel under the buttocks.
In this way, kneel on the floor/mat/carpet.
Keep the spine straight and the back relaxed.
The thighs, knees, calves, and the feet should be close together in neutral position without any effort of joining them.
Rest the palms on the knees or at the sides, if not performing during meals.
Breathing should be normal.
Sit in the pose for 10 minutes in the beginning. Increase the duration over time upto thirty minutes.
2. Veerasana
‘The hero’s pose’: this pose is a great practice for those who have trouble keeping their spine straight. Keeping the thorax straight and relaxed is beneficial and highly recommended for individuals who face acid reflux. It can be practiced on a mat/blanket/carpet/bed etc.

Sit with both the legs extended forwards.
Fold the right leg and place its heel under the buttocks.
Bend the left leg at the knee and place it heel on the mat besides the right knee.
Bend the left elbow and place it on the left knee.
Place the left hand below the chin. Let the face rest on it.
Place the right palm on the right knee.
This is the final position. Breathing should be normal.
Practice for upto 30 minutes after having meals. Change the sides in between if required.
3. Sheetkari Pranayama
‘The cooling breath’: this breathing practice is extremely beneficial for individuals with acid reflux. It cools the esophagus and the stomach, making the gastric contents stay below the level of the esophagus. It should be practiced outdoors in a clean environment.

Sit in Sukhasana.
Close the eyes gently.
Very gently clench the jaws.
Open the lips to reveal the teeth.
Suck in air through the mouth.
Exhale through the nose.
This is one respiration.
Practice 30 respirations.
4. Sheetali Pranayama
Sheetali Pranayama is similar in benefits to Sheetkari Pranayama, but it is a great replacement for those who cannot practice Sheetkari Pranayama due to tooth sensitivity or missing teeth. It can be practiced anywhere but it is better done in fresh air close to nature.

Sit in Sukhasana or vajrasana.
Roll the tongue in the form of a tube and fit it in between both the lips.
Suck in air through the tongue and fill the stomach with it.
Keep it in for five seconds.
Exhale through the nose.
Practice10 such respirations.
Do not practice in extremely cold weather.
Lifestyle/Dietary Tips
Do
Consume natural stomach acid neutralizers like chilled milk.
Observe the gap in between meals.
Eat cool foods such as rice, cucurbitaceous fruits, etc.
Consume electrolytes such as lemonade, coconut water, etc.
Drink water 30 minutes before meals to wash out excess acid production.
Keep sitting for 30 min after meal to ensure optimum blood circulation in the digestive tract.
Don’t
gnore early and mild acid reflux episodes.
all for the temptation of drinking sodas; since the thought of drinking chilled aerated drinks may sound relieving but these drinks contain carbonic acid in them which not only aggravates stomach acid but also dehydrates us.
at spicy food, hot food and oily food since it unbalances gastric secretions.
Drink water after meals since it interferes with digestion.
Drink hot beverages after big meals.
Overeat, to allow space in the stomach for proper digestion.
Lie down immediately after eating, since it shall weaken the LES.
Conclusion
GERD is uncomfortable but it is not untreatable, especially when the side effects of medication and surgery can be avoided by strictly following a lifestyle with a purpose of minimizing GIT damage. The yoga practices prescribed above can be modified, intensified, or supported by other techniques as per the need of each individual under direct supervision of a dedicated yoga therapist. One should compulsorily and seriously follow the points given under ‘lifestyle/dietary tips’ in order to actually make a difference in their condition.




12. Life-Changing Yoga And Ayurvedic Remedies For Glowing Skin
Skin is often the first and most commonly noticed thing about people when we first meet them. Skin is an indicator of one’s health. Condition of one’s skin reveals a lot about how and what they eat, how much they sleep, how well they have been, etc. Some skin conditions are also indicators of biochemical parameters such as cholesterol. Skin appearance can be made better by taking steps to improve skin health. This article features some tricks backed by yoga and ayurveda, which shall help first restore skin health and then make its appearance better and also healthier in the long run.
Yoga Tips For Glowing Skin
Introduction
Man or woman, young or old, desires clear and youthful skin. We often compare our skin with that of the others but we forget that everyone’s skin is different. While we can’t change the appearance, texture, oiliness or complexion of our skin, we can try to make it the best it can be by following some tips backed by yoga and ayurveda. The use of ayurveda is somewhat external, since ayurvedic herbs can act as remedies for various skin disorders and problems. Yoga on the other hand benefits the skin by first correcting the energy blockages in the blood vessels deeper inside the skin.

Ayurvedic Remedies For Different Skin Problems
Ayurveda is not just about medications, it offers herbal remedies for every condition and every purpose. According to ayurveda experts there are many different medicinal herbs which can be of great benefit in different skin problems.

Dark Spots & Blemishes: using a toner made of cucumber and potato reduces dark spots and blemishes significantly because of the depigmenting properties present in these vegetables.
Sunburns: paste made of chickpea flour and melon juice is extremely beneficial for treating sunburns. It should be applied all over the skin.
Dark Circles: nut oils such as almond oil, walnut oil, avocado seed oil etc should be applied around the eyes in a circular motion. They ease accumulated blood around the eyes and lighten dark circles.
Wrinkles: clay pack made with rose water and multani mitti help get rid of wrinkles. Care should be taken to avoid talking and moving facial muscles while the pack is still on.
White and Black Heads: packs made with clay and tree resins should be applied on the face wherever there are black or white heads.
Pimples: juice of tomato mixed with turmeric should be applied to the face. It has antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory properties and can reduce the occurrence of acne.
Yoga For Healthy Skin
Yoga acts at a level deeper than the superficial one and it purifies blood channels, therefore alleviating acne, fine lines, pigmentation and dark spots, etc. The following exercises are recommended for glowing skin:

1. Anuloma – Viloma
Also known as alternate nostril breathing, this is a great cleansing practice for the blood.

Sit on the mat with crossed legs.
Close your eyes gently.
Put the index finger of any hand on the forehead on top of the nose.
Use the thumb to close one nostril and inhale from the other nostril.
Release the thumb and close the other nostril with the index finger. Exhale.
Inhale with the same nostril and close it with the index finger.
Release the other nostril and exhale.
Practice upto thirty respirations.
2. Kapalabhat
This practice requires one to breathe fast and use the abdominal muscles to force exhalation. It will help release toxins from the body.

Sit on the mat with legs crossed.
Close your eyes gently.
Keep the back straight and spine relaxed.
Put the wrists on the knees.
Arms should be relaxed.
Inhale deeply and fully.
Using the abdominal muscles, exhale powerfully.
Keep exhaling using the abdominal muscles.
Practice upto 30 exhalations.
3. Bhujangasana
Meaning the pose of the cobra, this pose is a great practice for allowing blood circulation through the arteries in the neck and hence removing blockages.

Lie on your stomach.
Let the arms rest on both sides of the body.
Place the palms on the mat besides the chest.
Lift the head up, and bend the spine backwards with the stomach resting on the mat.
Support the body with the palms sharing its weight. Keep the elbows slightly bent.
Inhale while doing so.
This is the final position.
Stay in the final position for 5-10 seconds.
4. Chakrasan
Known as ‘the wheel pose’, it is an advanced asana that provides full blood circulation in the face. In the beginning, it should be practiced under expert supervision.

Lie on the back.
The arms should rest on both sides of the body.
Lift the arms and place the palms besides the head, with the thumb on the inside and the little finger on the outside.
Bend the knees and place the heels on the mat.
Lift the pelvis up from the mat.
Support the body by pushing the floor with the palms and the heels.
Curve the spine backwards and lift the torso up from the floor.
Inhale while doing so.
Keep doing so until the head is suspended.
Do not strain the back.
This is the final position.
Resume normal breathing in the final position and stay for at least 20 seconds.
Release the pose slowly by first lifting the head up from suspension.
5. Setubandhasana
Setu is the term for a bridge. This pose, known as the bridge pose, is an effective practice for preparation for Chakrasana. It is also beneficial for the face.

Lie on your back with arms resting on the sides and palms on the floor.
Bend both the knees and bring the heels close to the hips, the heels still resting on the mat.
Raise the pelvis off the mat, pushing the mat with the heels and the palms.
The line joining the neck and the knees should be straight.
This is the final position.
Exhale while reaching the final position.
Resume normal breathing in the final position.
Stay in the final position for upto 20 seconds.
This is one round. Practice upto ten rounds.
Dietary & Lifestyle Tips
Drink plenty of water. Water flushes out toxins and improves the supply of nutrients across the body.
Quit smoking. Smoking obstructs blood vessels and makes you look older than you are.
Reduce your alcohol consumption. Alcohol also makes you look older.
Use minimal makeup. Makeup clogs pores.
Apply sunscreen before going into the sun. UV rays of the sun can cause or increase pigmentation.
Avoid sharing makeup and facial towels with others. This shall prevent exchange of bacteria that lives on everyone’s skin.
Use natural products on the skin. These tend to have lesser chemicals and hence less side effects.
Use sunglasses for protecting the eyes and the skin around them when out in the sun.
Wash your face often with mild soap. It shall remove dirt and oil without making it dry.
Consume a lot of fresh fruits to avoid nutritional deficiencies and to make skin tighter and look younger.
Eat more raw fruits and vegetables as salad, they have high water content and are full of minerals.
Eat healthy fats instead of vegetable oils to prevent oxidation and aging.
Limit your sugar intake.
Get your bio markers tested every few months even if they are normal, they can indicate an upcoming illness.
Consume lemon water, coconut water etc. in place of soda, they are nourishing and low in sugar.
Monitor your caffeine intake; too much of it (more than300 mg a day) can aggravate aging.
Maintain a healthy body weight to avoid unnecessary stretching of the skin.
Conclusion
Skin health is a deciding factor in how the skin appears. While some characteristics of the skin are genetic and passed on to us by our parents, skincare can bring about small changes in how our skin appears. Different ayurvedic herbs can be applied externally on the skin. Herbs can have specific or general benefits. It is suggested that the yoga practices mentioned here be practiced along with the use of ayurvedic herbs suggested here and the dietary and lifestyle tips be followed, for maximum benefits. The yoga practices and the ayurvedic herbs mentioned here are generally safe for all individuals, and can be followed by everyone even in the absence of any skin problems.




13. Total Gut Restoration Steps With Yoga, Diet & Herbs
This article is a guide on restoring gut health by means of cleansing practices. Two kinds of cleansing practices are mentioned: dietary, done with food items, and yogic, done by Hathayoga techniques. The dietary practices are generally safe for everyone and can be done every once in a while. They take time to cleanse the gut. The yogic ones are more powerful and should not be done without guidance and out of supervision of an expert. They are intense and their frequency depends on the condition of an individual. Lifestyle tips are mentioned at the end to maintain gut health.
Gut Restoration
Introduction
Gut is often used as a slang conveying a meaning similar to ‘courage’ and ‘capacity’. Gut is actually the nickname for our digestive system; that’s why another popular use meaning ‘inner’ makes more sense, for example, when we say things like “I have a gut feeling about this”. Our ‘gut’ or the digestive system is responsible for our health even while it may not seem to be. We often think of the heart, the lungs and the brain as the most (or the only) important organs of our body, while it is the digestive system that provides energy to the whole body for all functions including those performed by the heart, the lungs and the brain.

Our Gut Or The Human GIT
GIT or the human gastrointestinal tract is a long tube that starts as the mouth and ends at the anus. It constitutes the oral cavity, the esophagus or the food pipe, the stomach, the small intestine, the large intestine, the rectum and the anus. The liver and the pancreas are supporting organs secreting important juices and hormones. Normally the GIT contains mucus and healthy bacteria in its different sections.

When we were younger our guts were clean and could process food at such a fast rate that we required feeding every two hours and we were energetic all the time. But with time, as we grow up, we start putting such things into our stomachs that harm not only the stomach or the digestive system but the whole body. This process of spoiling our guts is so slow that we do not realize what we are doing. We have made our guts sick over the last few years.

How We Have Made Our Guts Sick
Our GIT isn’t just affected by the foods we eat but also our lifestyle, sleep-wake, the kind of job we do, mental state, etc. Both diet and lifestyle have changed so much during the last 100 years. Earlier, more people were working in small and medium factories, farms and households. There were less luxuries, gadgets and means of transport. But with the advancement of technology we have a gadget or a device for everything, and we do not walk to the office, we do not rear our cattle, we do not grow or harvest our food. Meaning thereby, the physical activity of our lives has reduced greatly. Also, the kinds of foods we eat are done through many kinds of packing, processing, and preservation.

All these factors have made gut disorders more common and prevalent and the general health and immunity of humans weaker. This is why diseases like IBS, constipation, ulcerative colitis, etc. are now experienced by more people all over the world.

Signs of A Sick Gut
Our body cannot talk but it gives us various signals for every condition, in health as well as in disease. The gut also tries to communicate to us about its health especially when it is not well. The following signs should not be ignored, especially when any of these is prolonged or recurring.

Schedule of bowel movements: the frequency of bowel movements should generally be regular. A healthy person should be able to empty his bowels at least twice in three days.
Skin is an indicator: if acne appears on the body and does not go away, it means that your gut is not clean.
Extremely rotten farts even after bowel elimination: small movement of gas buildup just before the bowels are emptied can be considered normal. But if the gas passed is extremely smelly and causes pain, it is a signal that diet needs to be corrected or the intestines are not functioning properly.
Oral health and bad breath: if the mouth smells bad even if proper oral hygiene is taken care of, it means that the problem lies in the digestive system, not the mouth.
You don’t feel hungry: proper appetite is characteristic of a properly functioning digestive system. If you don’t feel hungry completely during the day, it means that your gut is not functioning well.
You feel bloated for no reason: bloating is caused by excess gas build up in the intestines. Small amounts of gas that can be passed out easily can still be considered normal but bloating that doesn’t go away for a day signals towards a sick gut.
You are losing weight but not fat from the abdomen: if you are able to lose fat from the rest of the body but not from the abdominal region then it means that there is excess visceral fat developed in between your abdominal organs. It is harmful for the whole body, especially the heart.
How To Cleanse The Gut
A. Dietary Cleanse:
Where poor dietary choices can spoil the gut, the opposite is also possible. Here are some very effective foods that have a cleansing effect on the gut:

Isabgol : The husk of psyllium florets forms a jelly-like bulk when added to water or milk or yogurt and is used to add volume to bowels which can then be removed with ease.
Natural Vinegars : Vinegars naturally fermented from apple, berries, sugarcane etc. are excellent cleansers for the GIT since they ease digestion and clean the intestines. They should be consumed in small quantities with salads and stir-frys.
Probiotic yogurts : Yogurts made with more than one kind of bacterium promote the growth of healthy bacteria in the intestines and cleans them. They should be consumed at times with meals.
Turmeric : Turmeric is anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial. It balances natural flora of the gut and also heals any ulcers that might be developing there. It should be added to food in small amounts.
Watermelon : Watermelon has the property of loosening stuck stool from the inner walls of the intestines. It should be eaten when it is in season.
Green Smoothie : A smoothie made with green leafy vegetables and fruit juices adds volume and essential electrolytes to the bowels. It should be consumed once in a while.
B. Yogic Cleanse:
This cleanse is instant, a little extreme and a lot more effective, and requires you to consult a yoga therapist first. Yoga has a special set of practices to clean the gut which is not commonly taught since it is mentioned in the ancient yogic texts that these practices should only be disclosed personally to the deserving and the needy. Special care regarding diet and routine is required after performing the kriyas.

Dhauti Kriya : Varisara Dhauti, Vastra Dhauti, Ghrut Dhauti, Vatsaara Dhauti, Agnisara Dhauti, Vamana etc. are various techniques of cleansing the whole or parts of gastrointestinal tract with various objects such as vacuum, water, cloth, ghee, oil, etc. This is extremely beneficial in conditions that require emergency care.
Vasti Kriya : vasti is an ancient practice that has inspired the contemporary rectal cleansing technique ‘enema’. Vasti is mentioned in ancient yogic as well as ayurvedic texts as an extremely efficient cleansing practice of the colon. It is done using vacuum or freshwater.
How To Preserve Gut Health
Hydrate yourself: water is essential for proper metabolism.
Eat a balanced diet: to avoid nutritional deficiencies.
Do not stress: stress badly affects bowel movements.
Get enough sleep: sleep is essential for proper digestion and metabolism.
Quit smoking: smoking harms the whole body.
Limit alcohol consumption: alcohol reduces metabolism.
Eat fermented and probiotic food: they are good for the gut’s natural bacteria.
Be physically active: so that digestion is proper and there is no excess fat storage.
Maintain a healthy body mass: it shall be good in the long run.
Practice yoga: to maintain peace and health of the mind and the body.
Conclusion
It is easy to keep putting junk and fast food into the body but it is not really difficult to stop doing it, especially when there is such a vast variety of healthier foods and fun practices to do in order to restore and preserve gut health. The digestive system responds fast to changes and can regain its health in as little as two or three weeks. Accumulation of toxins in the lower half of the gut can be prevented altogether by following these practices regularly. Only, care should be taken to not attempt yogic cleanses on one’s own without the guidance of an expert. Hopefully this article made you want to try this gut restoration.




14. Yoga And Ayurvedic Diet For Healthy Pregnancy
Pregnancy is a special time for people for many reasons. It is indeed no less than a miracle of nature that tiny human beings can be created inside of other humans. It is undoubtedly exciting to discover that you’re expecting, but this period of around 9 months demands utmost care and caution. It is not an old wives’ tale to be cautious during pregnancy; this advice holds value in the view of ayurvedic, yogic and medical experts alike. This article throws light on how pregnancy can be made the period of maximum awareness and optimum health by following a diet backed by Ayurveda and a routine backed by yoga, and how it shall be beneficial for the mother as well as the baby.
Yoga Tips During Pregnancy
Introduction
Diet and routine affect our lives more than they seem to. They are two axles of the vehicle of health which we are riding; each is independent of each other but also complementary; the rider is bound to suffer if either of the two axles is not working fine or taken care of.

Diet is a collective term for the net amount of food consumed by an individual based on their food preferences including taboos. A balanced diet is important for everyone – the elderly, the adults, the youngsters, the children, the neonates and most importantly – those whose bodies are still being formed inside the bodies of their mothers.

On the other hand, routine is a set of activities that are done without making any special efforts or imposed regularity. This is the reason why health-benefiting practices are advised constantly to be included in one’s routine.

An ayurvedic perspective can make it easier to understand what factors the physical constitution of the growing child depends on?

Doshic Constitution of Baby And Parents’ Body
Authors of various ayurvedic texts agree that the body constitution we have is determined by the dominance of tridosha i.e. three forces governing the universe. They are Vata (dry and light), Pitta (hot and flaring) and Kapha (moist and heavy). The dominance of the tridosha in a body is decided by the following factors:

Dominant dosha at the time of conception; and
Diet and routine of the mother.
1. Dominant Dosha At The Time of Conception
We cannot completely control or modify the first factor i.e. the dominant dosha at the time of conception, especially if the conception is spontaneous. However, if the pregnancy is well planned, chances are that the conception is also planned. If this is the case, both partners should start practicing healthy eating as soon as possible, and try to restore a healthy balance of the doshas. A balanced state of the tridosha can be achieved by following these steps:

Dominant dosha should be determined first. One or two doshas can be dominant in an individual; one of them still being principal.
If any dosha is aggravated to an extent that it is causing disease, it should be recognized by consulting a competent ayurvedic expert. The dosha that is dominant is the one aggravating first.
All symptoms should be observed closely and then it should be recognized whether more than one doshas are aggravated.
The couple should then get a custom diet chart for rectifying the imbalance of tridosha, and follow it strictly even if there are no major health conditions.
They should then consult a yoga therapist in order to get prescribed with an integrated programme suiting their tridoshic needs.
Both the partners should practice the modified diet and lifestyle strictly until conception.
In this way at least one determinant, i.e. the dominant dosha at the time of conception can be secured to its best possible condition; since not much of it is under human control.

2. Diet And Routine of The Mother
After conception i.e. when the baby’s body starts developing from a single living cell, the mother’s diet and routine are crucial in building or destroying the baby’s health. The body of the fetus (baby is called fetus when still in the womb) develops in the following phases:

Initially everything is fluid. Out of the fluid, blood forms. From the blood, flesh forms. From the flesh, adipose tissues form. Then the bones develop followed by bone marrow. Then muscles develop. At the end, reproductive cells develop.

It is interesting to see that the first form of our body was fluid, a mixture of mucus and reproductive cells of our parents’ bodies. Genetic information is passed through the reproductive cells. The point not to be missed here is that the child’s body, health & disease; all depends on what the physical constitution of the parents were, what their diet was, and what their routine. It is hence of utmost importance to rectify the mother’s diet and routine after the pregnancy has started; the sooner the better.

Diet Backed By Ayurveda
Tridoshic Foods: The expecting mother should follow a diet that doesn’t aggravate or vitiate any dosha. Such foods may sound boring at first since pregnancy food aversions and cravings are justifiably famous (or infamous).
Examples are: Khichdi, Dal-rice, etc.
Sattvic Foods: All food meant for a pregnant woman should be prepared with a positive mindset. It should consist of only fresh and nourishing ingredients.
Examples are: All healthy, light and freshly prepared food.
Fresh Fruits & Vegetables: Consuming raw fruits and vegetables as a salad accompanied by buttermilk, yogurt, coconut cream etc. assures that nutritional deficiencies wouldn’t occur.
Examples are: Cold salads with sour cream, Fruit salad with fresh dairy cream.
Nuts, Seeds & Dried Fruit: Nuts, seeds and dried fruits are tiny packets of enormous nutrition. They should be consumed in moderation to get maximum benefits. They shall help maintain a healthy heart and blood throughout and even after the pregnancy.
Examples are: Walnuts, Sunflower seeds, Sesame seeds, Raisins, Dried figs, etc.
Besides including these foods in the diet, a pregnant woman should quit smoking, alcohol, heavily spiced and street food during pregnancy. Street foods are made commercially at large scales with all emphasis on taste and do not have any nutritional value.

Routine Backed By Yoga
On hearing the word yoga many people start thinking of crazy poses that require practice and stamina. Well, only some parts of yoga fits this description, since yoga is not only poses but a beautifully created pathway to complete holistic health of the mind, body and spirit left behind by ancient Indian practitioners of self-realization.

Pregnancy may look like just life with a big belly ending into painful labor, but it includes too much care, caution, stress, physical discomfort and a fear of never being able to regain health and youth again. Physical health is only a bonus that comes with yoga practice.

Pranayama can be started as soon as pregnancy begins.
After the initial three months, easy practices like Tadasana, Shashankasana and Shavasana should be done under guidance and supervision of a competent yoga therapist.
After the first six months, meditation should be learned and practiced as a routine so that labor and delivery are not stressful.
All practices should be done after consulting a yoga therapist.
Conclusion
Pregnancy is not easy but it can be made more fulfilling for both the mother and the child. While Ayurveda can help an expecting mother and her child stay healthy at physical level, yoga affects her mental and spiritual levels and makes pregnancy a smooth ride. A woman who has practiced meditation during her pregnancy gets more benefits from it that any other human being could ever get. Yoga and Ayurveda coincide on many subjects and pregnancy is such a subject where both yoga and Ayurveda agree.




15. Hearing Loss : Mechanism, Diagnosis & Restoration With Yoga & Ayurveda
Hearing loss significantly affects one’s quality of life and their social and emotional growth. Although hearing loss is common and occurs gradually as one gets older, it could also be due to structural and functional abnormalities of the ear and the nervous connections behind the ear responsible for the complete mechanism of hearing and sound processing. Abnormal hearing could be present at birth which can be difficult to recognize in newborns and babies. Brainstem evoked response audiometry (BERA) test is useful in determining various aspects of hearing loss in babies and otherwise impaired adults. Yoga practices and Ayurvedic remedies to strengthen hearing have been discussed in this article.
Hearing Loss Restoration
Introduction
Our social and personal life depends greatly on how developed our communication skills are, and communication skill development depends greatly on speech and hearing. Hearing defects present at birth could impair a child’s growth and cognitive development. But any abnormality detected earlier in life can be restored effectively so that growth and development is not compromised, the sooner the better. Before moving on to the diagnostic procedures and restorative and preventive practices, let us understand how hearing works in humans.

The Mechanism of Hearing
Our ear is a complex organ with most of its mechanism hidden inside the head and only a little of it visible to us from outside. We shall look at it by first dividing it into three parts. The outer one-third is called the ‘outer ear’, which is shaped like a cone so that the sound waves falling on it can converge and fall inside for further processing. The central one-third is called the ‘middle ear’, consisting of small musculoskeletal structures: the eardrum, on which the converged sound waves fall; and the malleus, the stapes and the incus. They together amplify these waves, and then send them further inside. The innermost one-third part is the ‘inner ear’, which is also called cochlea. The cochlea has nerve cells on its inner end. Thin hairy structures are joined to these nerve cells whose function is to convert sound waves into electrical signals in raw form, which are again understood by the brain in the form of sound.

Hearing Loss
Partial or complete inability of any of the organs responsible in the mechanism of hearing is called hearing loss. It could be mild, so much that it could go unnoticed, or it could also be proceeding towards permanent loss i.e. deafness. Hearing loss can be contributed to by degenerative changes, which means that some degree of loss of hearing is considered normal in the elderly. Depending on which part of the ear is not functioning normally, hearing loss is studied as any of the following three types:

Conductive, i.e. that occurring in the outer or middle ear,
Sensorineural, i.e. one that occurs in the inner ear; or
Mixed, i.e. a combination of conductive and sensorineural.
Sensorineural hearing loss could occur when the inner ear has been damaged, which mostly occurs in the long-term due to exposure to loud, continuous noises. However, accumulation of earwax also contributes to impaired hearing. Conductive hearing loss could be caused by an infection, or a perforation in the eardrum due to a sharp object, or sudden loud noises (such as those of fireworks), or sudden and significant changes in ambient air pressure. Growth of bones or tumors in the outer or middle ear can also adversely affect hearing.

Hearing Tests
We can easily tell when we require an eye sight test, but we may not be able to realize the requirement of getting our ears tested for hearing because hearing loss is gradual. However, some signs like not being able to differentiate talk from background noise and feeling the need to raise TV volume even when no one else feels so, tell that one has a problematic hearing. Adults should get hearing tests regularly, like once every ten years until their mid-40s and then more frequently.

Adults can take normal hearing tests where they have to tell what they heard over a series of sounds and words played into each ear in a sound-proof room, but what about children and babies, and most importantly, infants and newborns? Hearing is crucial in the cognitive and communicative development of a child; therefore each infant should be tested for proper hearing. More developed tests are done for testing hearing in newborns and babies. Such a test is the BERA test.

What is BERA?
B.E.R.A., which expands to brainstem evoked response audiometry, is a form of hearing test that is done on children usually younger than 7. Because the baby cannot itself tell if its brain is satisfactorily receiving and processing sound signals, the tests used for testing hearing in adults cannot be used for babies. Unlike other hearing tests that rely on the individual’s verbal response, the BERA test uses the responses originating from those parts of the child’s nervous system that are concerned with the sense of hearing. It can be performed for newborns as a confirmation for their general wellbeing, or for babies and infants if parents think they have a problem in hearing.

Procedure
While the baby is asleep, gentle earphones are put on the baby’s ears.
Small ends of wires are stuck to the baby’s head on specific points at 3-4 places.
These wires are connected to a computer.
Sounds are played through the earphones.
As the baby hears them and its brain responds to them, nervous signals show on the computer.
The softest sound that the baby responds to is noted as the baby’s hearing ability.
If the baby’s brain doesn’t respond to these sounds, the test may be repeated after two weeks.
Important Points
The test is safe and non-invasive.
It may take 60-90 minutes to get the test done.
It is conducted while the baby is asleep. Therefore, parents are told to keep the baby awake before they arrive for the test.
It can be done for children over 3-4 years if they can lie still while awake.
If the results are satisfactory according to the doctor, no further testing or treatment shall be required.
If the results are not found satisfactory by the doctor, either testing is done again after some weeks or treatment is begun.
Efficacy of BERA Test in Hearing Loss Diagnosis
It is suggested that hearing loss tests be done for children early in life because hearing is an extremely important factor of the child’s development of speech, expression, cognition and mental health. If the nerve responsible for conveying sound signals from the outside to the brain is working fine in terms of clarity and speed, hearing is considered healthy or normal. The BERA test can provide information about the following parameters:

If the signals are being conveyed at all
Speed of transmission of signals
Whether or not the rate of transmission is normal
Which part is functioning abnormally; i.e. conductive, or sensorineural
What is the degree of abnormality
Health of the child’s inner ear
If one ear functions different than the other
Presence of tumors or other growth
It has been found out in a twenty-two month long study that the BERA test is highly effective in finding out which part of the ear is responsible for the faulty hearing mechanism. It also finds out if there is any injury, damage or inflammation near the pons and the cerebellum. This study suggests that the BERA test should be used by more ENT specialists since it can also detect neurologic conditions in addition to faulty hearing. [1] It is especially recommended for patients who are physically or mentally unable to take part in regular hearing tests.

Yoga For Better Hearing
We know that general flexibility and fitness can be boosted by practicing yoga exercises, but what is not commonly known is that yoga has the most systematic approach towards managing and preventing sensory and neurological conditions. Hearing is an example of such conditions where the external organ is of lesser importance in the whole mechanism, and the nervous system has a greater role to play. The following exercises are recommended to be practiced in the same sequence as they are mentioned in:

1. Trikonasana
‘The Triangle Pose’: this pose enhances blood circulation and forms the basis of all nerve-strengthening exercises. It is a mild but effective practice for restoring neurosensory disorders.

Stand with the legs wide apart. Raise both arms at the sides of the body parallel to the ground.
Bend forwards and touch the right foot with the left hand. The torso shall rotate accordingly.
Perform on the other side similarly.
Perform 10 rounds.
2. Vyaghrasana
‘The Tiger Pose’: Known as the tiger pose, this is a dynamic exercise. This shall balance the chemical and physical processes of both the cerebral hemispheres.

Stand on all fours i.e. kneel and place the palms on the floor.
Keep the elbows and the knees relaxed but firm.
Inhale and drop the back to make it a downward curve. Face should be upright.
Now extend the left arm and the right leg straight and parallel to the ground.
Exhale and form an upward curve with the back. The face should be down and the chin close to the neck.
Extend the right arm and the left leg parallel to the ground.
Repeat each position ten times.
Relax the neck and the back.
Lift the palms from the mat.
Perform ten rounds on each side.
3. Padmasana
‘The Lotus Pose’: Padmasana has been used by yogis since ages to enhance functioning of the nervous system.

Sit with the legs outstretched.
Place the right foot on the left thigh and place the left foot on the right thigh.
Keep the spine straight and the whole body relaxed.
Keep breathing deeply and normally.
Sit in this pose for as long as you would like to.
4. Natarajasana
‘The Lord of the Dancers Pose’: named after lord Shiva, the king of all the dancers, this is an advanced pose and is extremely beneficial for balancing the nervous and physical equilibrium. It is beneficial for all neurosensory disorders.

Stand with the feet equally sharing the weight of the body.
Hold the right big toe with the right hand.
Raise the left arm in front of the body.
Simultaneously, pull the toes of the right foot with the right hand.
Balance the whole body on the left leg.
Stay in this position for at least 10 seconds.
Release and perform on the other side.
It may take some time to balance the whole body on one leg, but it can be perfected with practice.
5. Anuloma Viloma Pranayama
‘Alternate Nostril Breathing’: a subtle practice, meant for improving the overall nervous functioning.

Sit with your legs crossed.
Close your eyes gently.
The back should be straight and relaxed.
The wrists should rest on the knees in the default position.
Put the index finger and the ring finger of the right hand on the forehead on top of the nose.
Use the thumb to close the right nostril.
Inhale with the left nostril.
Close the left nostril with the ring finger.
Exhale with the right nostril.
Inhale with the right nostril and close it with the thumb.
Exhale with the left nostril.
Practice thirty respirations in this way.
6. Bhramari Pranayama
‘Humming Bee Breath’: this humming bee practice stimulates normal and healthy functioning of the brain and the spinal cord. It is not only a great restorative practice for hearing, but also a great practice for entering meditation.

Sit with your legs crossed.
The spine and the back should be straight and relaxed.
Close your eyes gently.
Gently plug both the ears with the thumbs of both hands.
Put the fingers on each eye.
Inhale deeply, and with exhalation, make a deep humming sound like a bee.
Practice seven times.
7. Yoga Nidra
‘Yogic Sleep’: A relaxation meditation, the Yoga Nidra is also known as ‘yogic sleep’ where the body is reenergized as it is in actual sleep, in much less time. It is actually more beneficial than an actual sleep. It should be guided for non-adepts. It is done by first practicing Shavasana.

Lie down in Shavasana.
Start by moving the attention towards the feet. After a few seconds, move the attention up through the legs, the pelvis, the back, the abdomen, the arms, the thorax, the neck, to the head.
Observe the whole body.
Breathing should be regular and relaxed.
When guided, wake up and end the session.
Yoga Nidra relaxes the whole body.
It rejuvenates the mind and relieves stress.
It treats all chronic physical and mental disorders.
Sometimes, when the condition of an individual doesn’t allow them to perform any other yoga practices such as asana or Pranayama, Yoga Nidra is the only safe and feasible treatment for a patient.

Ayurvedic Remedies For Hearing Loss
Planet Ayurveda manufactures pure herbal formulations that are used as medications and tonics worldwide. These formulations are carefully sourced from authentic texts on Ayurveda written in ancient India thousands of years ago. The formulations are chemical free and additive free and thus safe for consumption by people of all ages and individual conditions. The products are suitable for people with all dietary preferences and restrictions since these are completely plant-based, halal and completely organic. A combination has been created by experts at Planet Ayurveda for ayurvedic management of hearing loss.

Product List
Brahmi Chyawanprash
Ashwagandha Capsules
Neuro Plan Syrup
Product Description
Brahmi Chyawanprash : It is a jam-like formulation made with around thirty herbs including Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri), Dashamoola, Bala (Sida cordifolia), etc. It is not only a tonic for the nerves and the brain, but also restores equilibrium of all the doshas.
Dosage : 1-2 tsp thrice daily after meals, with milk.
Ashwagandha Capsules : Pure Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) is made into the form of capsules for improving nervous transmission and response. It improves coordination of the sensory organs and the central nervous system.
Dosage : 1-2 capsules twice daily after meals, with regular water.
Neuro Plan Syrup : A formulation of around ten herbs including Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica), Jyotishmati (Celastrus paniculatus), and Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis), this syrup is a powerful tonic for neurosensory function.
Dosage : 1-2 tsp twice daily.
Conclusion
Advanced tests like the BERA can detect even the mildest of hearing losses not only for children but also for adults. Hearing may not be completely restored but it can be greatly improved with yoga and Ayurveda. The herbs described here are safe for everyone. The yoga practices mentioned here have been mentioned keeping in mind their efficacy and safety of practice for everyone regardless of their age, gender, and the condition of their health (or disease). However, any routine should be begun after due consultation with a competent yoga therapist. In case of severe disability, the yoga therapist may add, remove or modify some practices. These practices shall not only help manage but also prevent hearing loss in the long term.






16. Could Yoga And Ayurveda Help Reverse Heart Damage?
This article is about common conditions affecting the heart and the blood vessels, and whether (and how) those conditions can be managed and prevented by yoga and ayurveda such that previous, better states of heart health can be restored. Since cardiovascular problems develop over time, it takes time to resolve them. Unless it’s too late and the damage is practically irreversible, it is not impossible to restore heart health. Intensive lifestyle and dietary modifications are advised along with some ayurvedic heart tonics and yoga practices. Treatment of genetic conditions essentially requires medical intervention while lifestyle oriented conditions respond well to restorative therapy. The practices mentioned here are safe for everyone.
Introduction
The supply of blood that carries oxygen and nutrients is facilitated by the heart, which makes the heart indispensable for the body. The heart is made of a special muscle that works all the time non-stop and never gets tired. But it does get worn out and obstructed due to many physical and lifestyle factors. Stress, poor food choices, and habits such as smoking, put an extra pressure inside the vessels that carry blood from the heart to the body, called the arteries and clog them. This blockage interferes with normal blood circulation and causes high blood pressure, slower cellular metabolism and difficult respiration. These are just symptoms but are often confused as independent conditions. Symptoms should not be ignored since untreated mild heart disease can worsen to heart failure.

Yoga Tips For Heart Problems
Heart Diseases And How They Develop
Diseases on the interior or the exterior of the peripheral blood vessels, the major arteries and veins and the heart itself, all count as cardiovascular diseases. Common diseases affecting this system are:

Abnormally high blood pressure caused by faulty diet and lifestyle, known as hypertension.
Too much circulating lipoproteins in the blood, caused by faulty diet and lifestyle; known as high cholesterol or hyperlipidemia.
Abnormal heart rate caused by hypertension; known as arrhythmia.
Stiffness in the arteries caused by hyperlipidemia; known as atherosclerosis.
Weakened and stiffened heart walls, caused by chronic hypertension and hyperlipidemia; known as cardiomyopathy.
Poorly functioning arteries caused by chronic atherosclerosis, known as coronary artery disease (CAD).
There are many factors that contribute to an impaired functioning of the cardiovascular system. They can be categorized into: genetic factors, lifestyle factors and environmental factors.

Genetic or Birth defects
abnormalities in the heart present at birth such as leaking valves, leaking chambers, or even missing valves are genetic and sometimes need surgery. Such defects cannot be restored without medical intervention.

Lifestyle related causes
Lifestyle can make or break one’s health. A faulty lifestyle is one that starts disturbing one’s health physically as well as mentally. Poor diet choices, lack of physical activity, smoking, alcohol consumption, and a routine non-adherent to time all count as faulty habits. Such disorders can be managed very well with lifestyle and diet modification.

Poor dietary choices: diet makes up the body and if it lacks in any aspect; be it nutrients, freshness, proper portion sizes or plant/animal sources; the body suffers. Just by taking care of what one eats, all deficiencies and as well as poor immunity can be eliminated.
Lack of Physical Activity: when we move, the heart is awakened from its laziness and it starts pumping fuller volumes of blood. Being physically active keeps the cardiac muscles working and the blood vessels in great condition.
Smoking, Alcohol and Drug abuse: all these activities put an extra load on the heart as they severely increase the blood pressure. Also, the nervous system gets cut off from the body on consumption of intoxicants, which further affects decision making abilities that harm health in every way.
Relation with other diseases: conditions such as high cholesterol, hypertension, diabetes, obesity, stress and anxiety are causes as well as consequences of heart diseases. They also contribute to each other and complicate the situation further, hence shouldn’t be ignored.
Environmental causes
The components present around us also contribute in determining our state of health. The decreased exposure to fresh air due to air conditioning becoming common, increased atmospheric temperature due to global warming, and a dangerous amount of pollutants present in the air are environmental triggers for an impaired cardiovascular performance. Environmental factors also count as lifestyle factors.

Temperature shocks: even the middle class home has ACs and heaters installed. It all counts for an artificial environment. When the temperature outside a building differs greatly with the atmosphere outside it, the cardiovascular system gets a shock and contracts or dilates in response to the temperature change. This adversely affects the heart as well as the arteries.
Pollutants: fumes from petrol and diesel, and gaseous pollutants such as nitrogen dioxide inflame the cardiovascular system by first entering the lungs and then obstructing the arteries. Even room fresheners count as indoor air pollutants.
Is It Possible To Reverse Heart Disease?
Heart diseases can be managed, depending on the cause and kind of the disease and for how long it has been with the individual. Although some experts may disagree about the possibility of reversing heart disease completely, most would agree that they can be prevented from becoming more severe. In fact, doctors and hospitals are conducting restorative programs as part of treatment of heart diseases after the American physician Dr. Dean Ornish successfully demonstrated that following a strict lifestyle can dramatically restore health even in the severest of diseases. [1]

Yoga Practices For Heart Health
Yoga physiology holds the heart and the blood vessels in high regard since the heart is an important energy centre or chakra, by meditating on which, life energy can be transformed into spiritual energy. Those practices that have a powerful impact on the heart are described here. The practices described here are not contraindicated for anyone. For healthy individuals and those with only mild conditions, all yoga practices are safe and recommended.

1. Supta Udarakarshanasana
the spinal twist: this practice gently works on all major blood vessels. It should be done essentially on an empty stomach. It can be done on a mat/ carpet/ dari or even the bed.

Lie on your back. Keep the arms on the sides.
Keep the body relaxed.
This is the initial position.
Bend the right leg at the knee.
Move the right knee towards the left of the body and place it on the mat.
Keep the spine straight as in the initial position.
Press the right knee with the left elbow.
Keep the right hand placed as in the initial position.
Turn the neck to the right.
This is the final position. Stay in the final position for 5 seconds. Breathing should be normal.
Return to the initial position.
Now bend the left leg at the knee.
Move the left knee towards the right of the body and place it on the mat.
Press the left knee with the right elbow.
Keep the left hand as in the initial position.
Turn the neck to the left.
Stay in this position for 5 seconds. Breathing should be normal.
Release the posture. Practice thrice on each side.
2. Ardha Matsyendrasana
named after sage Matsyendra, this asana is an easy practice to pump up the cardiac muscles without tiring the rest of the body. It too should be done on an empty stomach. A mat/ carpet/ dari/ mattress will be required.

Sit on the mat with both the legs extended in front of the body.
Keep the back straight.
Keeping its heel on the mat, bend the left leg at the knee.
Keep the right leg straight.
Place your right hand on the left ankle.
Place the left hand behind you on the back.
Move the chin close to the left shoulder.
Exhale while doing so.
This is the final position.
Stay in this position for 10 seconds.
Resume normal breathing.
Rotate the neck back to the default position.
Lift the hands from their positions and straighten the leg.
Now, bend the right leg.
Place the left hand on the right ankle.
Place the right hand behind you.
Move the chin close to the right shoulder.
Exhale while doing so.
Resume normal breathing and stay in the final position for 10 seconds.
Rotate the neck back to the default position.
Lift the hands from their positions and twist back as in the initial position.
Practice thrice on each side.
3. Bandha Hasta Utthanasana
Overhead tied arms pose: this is an easy and effective exercise for enhancing blood circulation in the whole body, hence removing arterial plaque buildup. It can be done at a gap of at least three hours after a medium-sized meal. It doesn’t require a mat/ carpet.

Stand straight with the feet together in a neutral position.
Both the feet should share the body weight equally.
Put one wrist on the other such that they form a cross with each other.
Raise the arms and move the crossed wrists above the head.
Inhale and bend the head backwards to look at the hands.
Release the crossed wrists.
Now straighten the arms at the sides slowly.
Bring the arms down and place the wrists in crossed position as earlier.
Practice it 10 times.
4. Anuloma Viloma Pranayama
alternate nostril breathing: this practice has numerous benefits and applications. It is majorly used to purify blood channels. It is an excellent practice to minimize chronic hypertension and hyperlipidemia. It should preferably be performed outdoors on an empty stomach. It can be done sitting on the grass.

Sit with your legs crossed.
Close your eyes gently.
The back should be straight and relaxed.
The wrists should rest on the knees in the default position.
Put the index finger and the ring finger of the right hand on the forehead on top of the nose.
Use the thumb to close the right nostril.
Inhale with the left nostril.
Close the left nostril with the ring finger.
Exhale with the right nostril.
 Inhale with the right nostril and close it with the thumb.
Exhale with the left nostril.
Practice thirty respirations in this way.
5. Shavasana: the corpse pose
An extremely popular practice due to its relaxative effects and fun technique, this pose is used to multiply the benefits of all practices. It is a relaxation exercise done at the end of the Asana and Pranayama routine. It can be performed on a mat/ carpet/ dari/ grass or on the bed.

Lie on the floor/mat/blanket.
The whole body should be relaxed.
Arms should rest on both sides of the body.
Close your eyes gently.
Breathing should be normal.
Pay attention to the breaths. Observe each inhalation and exhalation.
Don’t interfere in natural respiration.
On instruction by the therapist/instructor, summon attention from the breath.
Open your eyes when guided.
Take a side turn and get up from the mat or go to sleep as required.
6. Hridaya Mudra
mudras have a very important place in Hatha Yoga and tantra. Everyone practices mudras knowingly or unknowingly but very few people know about the psychic and healing effects of mudra practice. Hridaya mudra is such a mudra that almost instantly relaxes the heart and when practiced long-term, it strengthens the heart. Hridaya mudra can be practiced at any time of the day.

Sit in any easy seated posture or lie down in Shavasana
Relax the whole body.
Join the tip of the ring finger with the tip of the thumb
Keep the rest of the fingers straight but do not strain any finger
Practice for up to thirty minutes.
7. Yoga Nidra
A relaxation meditation, the Yoga Nidra is also known as ‘yogic sleep’ where the body is reenergized as it is in actual sleep, in much less time. It is actually more beneficial than an actual sleep. It should be guided for non-adepts. It is done by first practicing Shavasana.

Lie down in Shavasana.
Start by moving the attention towards the feet. After a few seconds, move the attention up through the legs, the pelvis, the back, the abdomen, the arms, the thorax, the neck, to the head.
Observe the whole body.
Breathing should be regular and relaxed.
When guided, wake up and end the session.
✔ Yoga Nidra relaxes the whole body.
✔ It rejuvenates the mind and relieves stress.
✔ It treats all chronic physical and mental disorders. Sometimes, when the condition of an individual doesn’t allow them to perform asana or Pranayama, Yoga Nidra is the only safe and feasible treatment for a patient.

Ayurvedic Herbs For The Heart
Ayurveda and yoga agree that heart health is an indicator of as well as is affected by overall body health. According to Ayurveda masters, some herbs have specifically balancing, relaxing and strengthening effects on the heart and the blood vessels.

Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna) tree has countless medicinal benefits since it possesses the property of restoring balance in all doshas. It is especially recommended in conditions of the circulatory system. It is made in the form of tea, powder or capsules.
Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) is of enormous importance in the treatment of many disorders of the cardiovascular system. It is used as a powder or in the form of capsules.
Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri) along with Shankhapushpi is prescribed in the management of psychosomatic disorders. It reduces inflammation and regulates blood pressure. It is used as a tea, a Chyawanprash or made into syrup.
Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis) is an excellent antioxidant and hence a great cardiac tonic. It can prevent all disorders of blood and the heart. It is used as a floral tea powder, Chyawanprash along with Brahmi and Ashwagandha.
Compulsory Dietary & Lifestyle Modifications
Exercise and medications alone shall not work if a person is not willing to mend his diet. Diet makes up our body, how can we expect the body to change if we are not willing to change the diet? Therefore, the following dietary inclusions and exclusions should compulsorily be followed to enhance the effect of the above practices:

1. One should QUIT smoking.
2. One should eat LESS of the following items:
Meat, Fish, Eggs: the foods that are not plant-based will be difficult to digest. And vegetarianism has benefitted heart patients more than anything could ever work for anyone.

3. One should AVOID the following dietary items:
Processed dairy products: Though milk itself is not bad for the heart and neither is ghee, processed dairy products such as cheeses, sweets (especially those made of thickened milk with tons of sugar and fat in them) contribute to total cholesterol in the body.
Street food: street food is deep fried and has enormous amounts of spices and seasonings which make the food complex, and difficult to digest and absorb.
Pickles: Pickles contain too much oil, spices, salt and sugar. They should be replaced with fresh chutneys of tomato, coriander, mint, coconut, etc.
Packed, processed and preserved food: these foods are good for none. They have extra salt, sugar and oil, and processing kills their nutritional value.
Fried and difficult-to-digest foods: they have excess oil that might have gone chemically bad. They worsen all heart conditions in the long term, after immediately harming digestion and metabolism.
4. One should eat MORE the following items:
Herbal Teas: Not just as medications, herbal teas should be consumed regularly too, since they shall not only provide medicinal benefits but also give a choice to regular tea-coffee drinkers.
Fruits: Fruits have a quality of soothing the body. Fruits are full of fiber, vitamins and minerals.
Nuts, Seeds and Dried Fruits: almonds, walnuts, flax seeds, sesame seeds, raisins, prunes, cranberries, provide high quality fats and trace micronutrients that may have been missed out on in even the most balanced diets.
Electrolytes: salt, sugar, rock salt, black salt, etc added to water are helpful in rehydrating the body and maintaining blood tonicity. Potassium is supplied to the body by coconut water which acts even faster than salt.
Light Meals: dal-rice, Khichari and Dalia are meals that are light, nutritious and balanced in themselves. Also, such meals maintain the ayurvedic balance of the body besides supporting an easy digestion.
Ghee: Contrary to tempering and frying, consumption of ghee itself or with rice, khichdi & Dalia is a great practice in traditional Indian diet. Ghee extracted from Cow’s milk is especially recommended to people with heart problems.
Conclusion
Heart diseases can be life-threatening if initial symptoms are ignored. But what is the good part is that all heart diseases can be prevented by keeping a check on one’s bio parameters even when there are no symptoms and mending the diet and lifestyle accordingly. A lifestyle based on yoga and Ayurveda can prevent almost any disease and maintain a great physique as a bonus. It should be noted and strictly followed that any regime should be begun under the guidance of a competent yoga therapist since every individual’s condition differs and requires personal attention. Heart diseases can be prevented as well as reversed.




17. Yoga Tips And Home Remedies For Height Gain
We know that height is chiefly decided by genes. But what is not known is that lifestyle and nutrition are also contributing factors. Our body grows very fast until puberty and this is the best time to boost height. Growth still continues until twenty-one years. With an ability of targeting stimulation of hormones, Yoga and ayurveda can unexpectedly support nutrition. This article is for you if you’re worried about you or your kids being short. It describes easy but effective yoga practices, some ayurvedic supplements and nutritional tips to boost height gain, as a programme for an overall healthy growth and development.
Yoga Tips For Height Gain
Introduction: How Do Our Bodies Grow?
When we are born all our tissues are soft because they haven’t formed completely. The bones are especially soft; do you remember when you meet a newborn you’re advised not to touch its head since its skull is still soft, also, there is fear of joint dislocation while lifting a baby up. Then how do our bodies grow strong and so many times bigger, and what is the age when this growth and development can be maximized so that our kid grows a little taller than he was going to be?

Our growth is the maximum in the uterus and then even if it slows down, it continues until early twenties. Important changes happen to the body during the age twelve to eighteen, like growth of sexual characteristics. Teenage is considered an important phase for growth and development for many reasons, because important developmental changes take place in the child not just physically but also mentally and even deeper than that.

Factors Affecting Height
Our total height is greatly dependent on the length of our skeletal system. Our long bones i.e. the bones of the arms and the legs can be lengthened by exercise. Also, the health of the skeletal system should be maintained by taking special care of it via optimum nutrition. Nutrition can further be supported by herbal supplements that specifically target and keep away problems relating to the growth and development of the skeletal system. Hormones play a key role in metabolism, growth, coordination and development. Certain yoga practices can regulate and stimulate the production of all hormones including growth hormone.

Yoga For Height Gain
The following exercises should be performed as a sequence every morning on an empty stomach. Each exercise should be done at least thrice.

1. Tadasana
literally meaning ‘the pose of a palm tree’, Tadasana stretches one’s spine as well as the legs. It is a great exercise to perform especially in one’s growing years. It increases blood flow and removes blockages in the spine, allowing optimum secretion of growth hormone.

2. Tiryaka-tadasana
literally meaning ‘the pose of swaying palm tree’, tiryaka Tadasana should be performed to enhance the effects of Tadasana. It makes the spine as well as the arms stronger and longer. It prepares the legs for the next exercise.

3. Parvatasana
literally meaning ‘the mountain’s pose’, Parvatasana is an excellent pose since it not only stretches the legs and back but also develops arm, chest and shoulder muscles. Its name justifies its benefits i.e. it makes one strong, tall and well-balanced.

Ayurvedic Remedies For Height Gain
Genetic constitution plays a great role in deciding the physical composition of an individual. We can still contribute to height growth as experts suggest that consumption of some ayurvedic herbs can supplement bone growth during the growing phase of life i.e. until when the soft ends of the long bones have not hardened and fused. Such herbs are:

Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera): an excellent cell growth promoter, this herb is known for its growth enhancing properties at all anatomical levels. It can be used as a powder or as capsules.
Asthisamharaka (Cissus quandrangularis): also known as asthi shrinkhala, this herb itself looks like the skeleton of a plant and is used for its many benefits for the skeletal system. It promotes proper bone growth. It is used as a fresh paste/ juice for consumption.
Moringa or Drumstick Tree (Moringa oleifera): this tree is used for it is full of medicinal properties. It also promotes growth and is a balanced source of macronutrients in itself. It is used as a powder.
Nutritional Tips
Nutrition is very important for children in their growing years because their bodies form from what they eat. Therefore the following steps should be incorporated into teenagers’ routine diet at least as long as they are still in their growing years.

Avoid Junk: teens want to have a fashionable social life which means that they want to eat out more often with their friends. This can cause several nutritional deficiencies in them. Eating out should be minimized by preparing good food at home itself.
Bad Habits: teens can also pick up habits like smoking and alcohol which impair their natural growth and development. This should be taken care of by the means of education and information by the parents.
Consume Beans and Legumes: They provide you with good-quality protein which is essential for stimulation of growth hormone. They can also provide iron and vitamin B complex, which is common to be deficient in an average teen’s diet.
Nuts: nuts like walnuts and almonds are a great source of healthy fats and trace minerals. They can help rule out the deficiency of trace nutrients and thus promote growth.
Green Leafy Vegetables: green leafy vegetables include spinach, kale, Brussels sprouts, and practically any greens. They contain more nutrients than you think. They supply your body with calcium, which is an essential nutrient for bone health.
Curds and Yogurts: Curds and yogurts are made with regular as well as plant based milks, and are a great source of protein and minerals such as calcium, potassium, magnesium and phosphorus.
Vegetables with Starchy Fiber: vegetables like sweet potatoes, corn, colocasia and sago are extremely essential for teens because they contain special types of carbohydrates that are different from those found in bread and potatoes.
Brown Rice: brown rice should be consumed by teens because of its high fiber and mineral content and versatility. It also contains amino acids that the teens require during their growing years.
Fruits: fruits are loved by everyone young and old but growing children should compulsorily eat big portions of fruits because fruits contain almost all the vitamins required by the human body in adequate quantities.
Milk: milk is the most nutritious and balanced food for us. It contains the essential composition of enough protein, fats and carbohydrates. When combined with fruits and nuts it makes a great supplement for bone growth.
Conclusion
Although the height of an individual majorly depends on the genetic makeup of their family, the possible height can still be maximized by supporting growth externally by means of yoga, ayurvedic supplements and a balanced diet. The practices described in this article are best supported by the supplements mentioned after them, and the results can be maximized by following the nutritional tips mentioned at the end. This combined programme shall require dedication and patience, but the reward shall also be worthy of it. All these practices provide multiple benefits and no side effects. Thus, these should be given a try especially when the person is in their growing years where growth can be increased by supporting the body’s natural growth.





18. Boost Your Memory With Yoga
Memory is the brain’s ability to catch, store and recall information. A person whose brain is efficient in these tasks is seen as bright and intelligent by society. Although it appears that some people have a great memory since childhood, it is not completely so. Memory can be sharpened at any stage in life, depending on the brain health and willingness of the individual. This article throws light on types of memory, the brain and its connection with the body, and effective yoga practices to boost memory.
Introduction
When we were younger, we were not rewarded if we could recite multiplication tables in the school but we were punished if we couldn’t. In college, we were expected to submit all assignments in time, and were held responsible for our own loss if we forgot to do so. And today, we must always remember to carry and wear our face masks. Sometimes we can’t recognize our classmates from school while they still can recognize us and even remember some events. But, we do not forget how to ride a bicycle if we learn it once. Why? All these incidents require our memory to be alright. Memory is a function of the brain, along with many other functions it performs. Memory makes life easy since it gets us recognition, importance and appreciation among our colleagues, family, friends and the society.

Yoga Tips To Enhance Memory
Types of Memory
Read the events described in the previous section again. Remembering multiplication tables and recognizing friends requires repetition and when repetition ceases, we tend to forget those images or sounds. These events are spread over years, and are part of our Long – term memory.

Sometimes, while getting ready for work, you take out a fresh face mask and put it on the counter or the dining table but you still forget to wear it while stepping out. This all happened over a short period of time; it is called short – term memory.

The activities we do not forget the way to do, like how to light up a cigarette, how to use a spoon, how to sip water, how to ride a cycle, or how to close the door are examples of skill memory.

The Human Brain
The brain has three parts: the cerebrum, the cerebellum, and the medulla. The cerebrum is the biggest, the cerebellum quite small and the medulla is a stem connecting the brain with the spinal cord. The functions of speech, language, hearing, detecting smells, differentiating touch, memory, learning and emotion are performed by the cerebrum. It is divided into two halves vertically; the right half and the left half. They are joined together and to the rest of the body by nerves.

How The Brain is Connected With The Body
Our body is symmetrical at both sides; we have two eyes, two ears, two arms and legs, two lungs, two buttocks, etc. And two halves of the brain! The right part of the cerebrum controls the functioning of the left side of the body. Similarly, the left side of the cerebrum controls the functioning of the right side of the body. When you use your right hand for writing, the left side of the brain is managing it. When you use your left hand to close the door, the right side of your brain is managing it. This is the reason why similar repetitions of exercises are advised to be done with both sides of the body. Exercise no. 3 mentioned in the next section is especially effective in balancing the functioning of both the hemispheres of the brain.

Yoga For Boosting Memory
Joint pain in Arthritis is due to diminished synovial fluid in the joints. As mentioned above, Hyaluronic acid helps to lock moisture within the joints and support optimal movement of the joints without triggering pain.

Bandha Hasta Utthanasana
Bandha Hasta Utthanasana is an easy and effective exercise for circulating oxygen in the whole body, especially the brain. It doesn’t require a mat/ carpet.

Stand straight with the feet together in a neutral position.
Both the feet should share the body weight equally.
Put one wrist on the other such that they form a cross with each other.
Raise the arms and move the crossed wrists above the head.
Inhale and bend the head backwards to look at the hands.
Release the crossed wrists.
Now straighten the arms at the sides slowly.
Bring the arms down and place the wrists in a crossed position as earlier.
Practice it 10 times.
Utthita Dolasana
This asana works on the nerves and sends energy circulation through them to the brain and the spinal cord. It is especially good for the brain and provides the benefits of advanced asanas. It also doesn’t require a mat/ carpet.

Stand straight with the feet wide spread.
Raise the arms above the head and keep them straight.
Leave the wrists loose.
Now bend forward and move in a swinging motion.
The upper body and the arms should move like a lifeless doll.
Slowly, return to standing position.
Practice 10 repetitions.
Vrikshasana
This pose is a great practice for balancing both the cerebral portions. It doesn’t require any mat/ carpet, but should be practiced preferably just after waking up.

Stand with both feet sharing equal weight of the body.
Close the eyes gently.
Place the heel of the right foot on the inner side of the left thigh.
Simultaneously, raise both arms and join both hands overhead in a Namaste.
Breathe deeply.
Bring the arms down and release the pose.
Repeat on the other side.
Trataka Kriya
This practice is meant for improving concentration and vitalizing the brain. With serious practice, it shall bring enormous powers to the brain which should be accepted by the individual as by -products of the practice. It also prepares you for meditation. During the initial practices, it is recommended that Trataka be done under guidance of an expert. It may bring memories from the subconscious and the unconscious mind. All incidences and visualizations, pleasant as well as unpleasant during or after should be reported to the guru.

Light a candle.
Place it on a surface so that when you sit with the back straight, it is at eye level.
Sit such that the flame of the candle is equidistant and in the centre of both the eyes.
Gaze at the tip of the flame without blinking.
Tears will appear in the eyes.
Close your eyes.
Watch the image of the flame with closed eyes.
Again open the eyes and gaze at the flame.
Practice twice or thrice.
After the final round, rub both palms vigorously and place them on the eyes.
Open the eyes or go to sleep or meditation.
Other Tips
Some practices help the brain perform better. They are like strength training for the brain. These are especially effective for young people.

Get plenty of sleep. During sleep, our brain keeps the rest of the body aside and sorts out its own matters. It organizes new memories and decides whether to store or discard them.
Memorize important information by revising it. If you wish to remind yourself of paying a challan amount before the weekend, keep reminding yourself about it after every few hours until you get it done.
Test and ask questions. If you are trying to teach your kid some new concept, ask them about it later in the day and then after a few days. In this way they will not forget it.
Involve various attributes of an event or an object to remember its details. Like while trying to remember the name of a new dish, remember it like “it was named bharta and it had many seeds in it”.
Eat a balanced diet. The brain requires good quality carbohydrates to function. So, do not restrict them, being convinced by any trending diet.
Conclusion
Like the rest of the body can be trained to perform better; the brain can also be trained; because brain is also a body organ. Its functions like creativity, memory, reasoning, emotions, and understanding can be made better if we understand how the brain works. The exercises described here do not only improve memory but all functions of the brain. These are therapeutic as well as preventive for mental illnesses. However, the recommended practices shall vary depending on each individual’s condition. The practices with the word ‘Kriya’ in their names are cleansing practices and should be done under guidance and supervision of a competent yoga therapist.




19. Yoga For Migraine
Severe headache in a part of the head is known as migraine. It is a common condition which may or may not be due to an underlying disease. It lasts for a few hours and may not come back for months. It is triggered by lights, sounds and certain medications. Some women may experience migraine as a part of premenstrual symptoms i.e. discomfort just before the onset of their monthly period. Yoga intervention can ease an ongoing migraine attack and also control the severity of future ones. This article describes migraine, its causes and how yoga practices can be helpful in dealing with migraine episodes.
Yoga Tips For Migraine
Introduction
Migraine is a condition of the nervous system whose most commonly known symptom is a headache in any part of the head. Migraine is thought to be just a headache but some people have a variety of symptoms accompanying a migraine, making it serious and causing far more discomfort than an ordinary headache. There can be surprising physical features that a migraine brings with it, such as visual appearances of light flashes and dark or bright spots in the view of the person. The occurrence of an episode of migraine is sometimes called an attack. A migraine attack makes a person unable to do any reading, cooking, driving, cleaning, etc. and all regular activities. An attack may last for a few minutes to a few hours. Sometimes migraines can be triggered or worsened by strong smells, loud noise and peculiar sounds.

Symptoms
Headache
Blurred vision
Nausea and vomiting
Dizziness and confusion
Fainting
Throbbing pain in the head
Sensitivity towards light and sound
Food craving or aversion
Lack of energy
Fatigue and weakness
Irritation / being annoyed
One can see visuals i.e. shapes or flashes of light and dark simultaneously.
Causes And Risk Factors
Various factors contribute to the development of any condition in an individual. Those could originate from one’s lifestyle or routine, or be triggered by their anatomical and physiological constitution. On this basis we see causes of a disease as lifestyle factors or physical factors. Also, some factors decide the severity and susceptibility of a condition affecting a particular individual. Those factors are known as risk factors.

Hormones, especially female hormones
Stress and Tension
Lack of sleep
Jet lag
Some medications
Certain foods
Caffeinated drinks
Genetic factors
Hunger or starvation
Certain smells
Physical exertion
Complications
Migraines can themselves lead to some conditions, or they may signal that some other conditions are developing in the body, such as:

Tumors in the head
Any structural abnormality of the skull or the brain
Serious disorders of the cardiovascular system, such as a heart stroke
Yoga For Managing Migraines
Although there is no permanent cure for migraine, which is why we say that prevention is better than cure. But individuals with a history of migraines respond positively towards therapy. Some yoga practices that are specifically relaxing and beneficial for easing migraines and their symptoms are mentioned below. These practices improve controlled blood flow in the brain and therefore ease migraines. These should be performed on an empty stomach, or at a gap of at least three hours after a medium sized meal.

Adhomukha Shvanasana
Stand on your mat, or the ground with the feet normally apart.
Raise both arms straight above upwards.
Start bending forwards until the palms rest on the ground /mat.
Now move the palms forwards and keep the buttocks pointing upwards.
Your body should form a symmetrical triangle.
This is the final position, stay in this position for around 10 seconds.
Repeat thrice.
Shashankasana
Sit on a mat or your bed by kneeling. The hips should rest on the feet.
Inhale while raising your arms straight up.
Start bending forward with the arms still extended.
Exhale, and keep leaning forward until your face touches the bed/mat.
Let the arms rest on the floor/bed.
This is the final position. Keep eyes closed and breathe normally in the final position.
Stay in this position for upto thirty minutes.
Paschimottanasana
Sit on the mat or your bed with legs straight in front of you.
Keeping the spine straight, raise and straighten the arms.
Inhale while doing so.
Lean forward until you can hold or touch your toes.
Exhale.
Touch your knees with the chin.
This is the final position.
Stay in the final position for at least 10 seconds.
Setubandhasana
Lie on your back with arms resting on the sides
The palms should be facing towards the floor.
Bend both the knees and bring the heels close to the hips, the heels still resting on the mat.
Raise the pelvis off the mat, pushing the mat with the heels and the palms.
The line joining the neck and the knees should be straight.
This is the final position.
Exhale while reaching the final position.
Resume normal breathing in the final position.
Stay in the final position for upto 20 seconds.
This is one round. Practice upto ten rounds.
Hastapadasana
Stand on the mat or the floor with both feet equally sharing the weight of the body.
Keep the body relaxed yet firm and straight in a neutral position.
Deeply inhale and raise both the arms upwards.
Slowly start bending forward.
Bring the arms downwards until you can touch the toes.
Bend a little more and stay in this position for a few seconds.
Practice normal breathing in this position.
Shavasana
Lie down on your back on the mat or a carpet, or even your bed.
The body should be relaxed.
The legs should be spread slightly apart and the arms should lie at both sides of the body with the palms exposed.
Close the eyes gently
Breathing should be deep.
Shavasana should be practiced for as long as one wants.
It can be combined with Yoga Nidra.
Lifestyle/Dietary Tips
Adapting a lifestyle that cuts out the physical factors contributing to worsening of any condition multiplies the benefits of a yoga routine by several times. The following tips are extremely beneficial for everyone with any or all symptoms of all kinds of migraines.

Quit smoking and limit alcohol consumption.
Maintain a healthy body weight.
Eat a diet balanced in all components.
Avoid packed and processed food.
Drink enough water (8-10 glasses per day).
Do not expose yourself to extreme noise and loud sounds.
Do not over exhaust yourself.
Do not starve yourself.
Keep blood glucose levels in check.
Have a balanced and good quality sleep.
Do not consume too much tea and coffee.
Try adding sugar as much as possible.
Get eye check up done and use corrective lenses if required.
Conclusion
Migraine is not a disease but just a condition that responds well to therapy. It is better prevented than cured. However, ongoing attacks of migraines can also be effectively eased with some yoga practices. Such practices have been described in this article along with those that can strengthen the nervous system so that future migraines are reduced in number as well as intensity. The practices described here are generally safe for all individuals. However, those with multiple conditions and pregnant women should begin any regime after due consultation with a competent yoga therapist. The lifestyle modifications given here should be followed strictly since a treatment is effective only when combined therapy is given with all components – diet, exercise and routine.





20. Management of PCOD With Yoga
PCOD or poly-cystic ovarian disorder is a disorder that has evolved within the last hundred years. That it wasn’t known before the 1900’s is a sign that it is a lifestyle disorder and can be managed with yoga practices. In PCOD, ovaries, the female reproductive glands, show abnormal growth of cysts, disturbing normal functioning of the entire reproductive system. Hormones are secreted abnormally and male characteristics such as facial & body hair appear. The imbalance of female hormones causes deviation of the body from natural feminine shape accompanied by unwanted weight gain. Symptoms, complications, related conditions, triggers and management tips, and why and how yoga can be the ideal therapy for PCOD has been discussed in this article.
poly-cystic ovarian disorder
Introduction
PCOD is a disorder of the female reproductive system. Its origin lies in the disordered growth of female glands, the ovaries, that contain countless immature egg cells, and release one of them each month when normal. In case of a malfunction, the cells aren’t released or fully matured and they keep sitting in the ovaries or the tubes connecting them to the uterus until they die and become cysts. Hence the name poly-cystic ovarian disorder. It adversely affects the mental health of a woman and needs to be treated with due care taken for the mental component as well as the physical component of the disorder.

Symptoms of PCOD
Although their reproductive systems confuse women by sending mixed signals at ovulation, menstruation and even at the beginning of a pregnancy, some distinct signs that point towards a disorder and require attention are:

Missed period without pregnancy.
Growth of facial hair, and also body hair.
Painful ovulation.
Painful sex.
Difficulty in conception.
Cramps without menstruation.
Extreme mood swings.
Stress & Anxiety.
Fat deposition around the waist.
Acne that won’t go away with skincare.
Seeing faults in one’s body image.
Lack of confidence.
Extreme symptoms include identity loss, depression and suicidal thoughts.
Complications And Related Conditions
Difficult Conception : The most probable complication PCOD leads to is infertility. This is also the reason for increased attention and awareness regarding women’s reproductive health. It doesn’t mean that women with PCOD can’t get pregnant, but there are chances of more complications before, during and after pregnancy.
Obesity : Although a connection between these may not strike at once, but it has been observed that weight management becomes difficult with PCOD. The reason might be hormone imbalance, because hormones directly affect metabolism and also the locations of fat accumulation on the body.
Stress, Anxiety And Depression : The female reproductive hormones directly affect mood and behavior. When mood swings continue for long, social relations and one’s perspective about oneself also gets affected. An individual with PCOD starts having episodes of constant stress which can also turn worse and become anxiety and depression. All of these mental conditions worsen PCOD.
Triggers
It can’t be emphasized enough that one’s mental state has great control of their hormones, and in turn, body functions. A diet deficient in nutrients is also a key controller of how the body functions. Lack of physical activity puts excess load on metabolism, further complicating things upto cellular level.

Suggested Lifestyle Modifications
The following tips are not beneficial for everyone with any or all symptoms of a disorder relating to the reproductive system.

Maintain a healthy body mass.
Be aware of what ingredients your food has.
Choose freshly cooked food over packaged one, and opt for minimum processing. Processed food hampers metabolism.
Engage in satisfying as well as relaxing activities. These shall be more beneficial in managing stress and ultimately build the required mindset for dealing with disorders, especially those which get worse with psychological disturbances.
Also, make physical activity a lifestyle. The best form of activity is yoga practices which would not only keep one active and burn energy, but also targets specific organs of the body which require attention.
Yoga For PCOD Management
Yoga helps minimize PCOD by hitting at the origin: it targets the glands that secrete female reproductive hormones. Following exercises require a mat or a folded blanket and need to be performed on an empty stomach, or at least three hours after having a medium-sized meal.

Paschimottanasana
Paschimottanasana means ‘the pose of stretched back’, or it is also called forward seated bend. This asana improves blood circulation in the pelvis and supports hormone secretion.

Sit on the mat with legs straight in front of you.
Keeping the spine straight, raise and straighten the arms.
Inhale while doing so.
Lean forward until you can hold or touch your toes.
Exhale.
Touch your knees with the chin.
This is the final position.
Stay in the final position for at least 10 seconds.
Setubandhasana
Setu is the term for a bridge. This pose, known as the bridge pose, is an excellent exercise specially prescribed for all uterine disorders.

Lie on your back with arms resting on the sides
Keep the palms facing down.
Bend both the knees and bring the heels close to the hips, the heels still resting on the mat.
Raise the pelvis off the mat, pushing the mat with the heels and the palms.
The line joining the neck and the knees should be straight.
This is the final position.
Exhale while reaching the final position.
Resume normal breathing in the final position.
Stay in the final position for upto 20 seconds.
This is one round. Practice upto ten rounds.
Marjari Asana
Popularly known as the cat pose, this pose is a combination of two poses where one’s back is hunched up and then dipped down. This exercise not only comforts PCOD symptoms, but also lessens the chances and degree of backache developing during ovulation.

Stand on all fours i.e. kneel and place the palms on the floor.
Keep the elbows and the knees relaxed but firm.
Inhale and drop the back to make it a downward curve. Face should be upright.
Exhale and form an upward curve with the back. The face should be down and the chin close to the neck.
Repeat each position ten times.
Relax the neck and the back.
Lift the palms from the mat.
This is one round. Perform three rounds.
Shashankasana
shashanka means rabbit; hence this pose is ‘the pose of the rabbit’. Shashankasana is a relaxation asana as well as a strengthening one. It targets all reproductive organs and stimulates regular hormone secretion.

Sit on a mat or your bed by kneeling. The hips should rest on the feet.
Inhale while raising your arms straight up.
Start bending forward with the arms still extended.
Exhale, and keep leaning forward until your face touches the bed/mat.
Let the arms rest on the floor/bed.
This is the final position. Keep eyes closed and breathe normally in the final position.
Stay in this position for upto thirty minutes.
Halasana
Popularly known as ‘the plough pose’, the final position of this pose makes you look like a wooden plough. It will bring down blood circulation from the thighs and collect it in the pelvis, and eventually help restore normal ovaries.

Lie on your back.
Keep arms resting on the sides, palms facing down.
Push the floor with the palms and lift both legs up.
Maintain the natural curve of the back while lifting the legs.
The knees shouldn’t bend.
Move the legs further in the same direction until they rest on the mat behind your head.
Exhale while doing so.
Support the back with the palms.
This is the final position.
Resume normal breathing in the final position.
Stay in the final position for at least 10 seconds.
Conclusion
PCOD starts in the reproductive system but ends up disturbing the normal processes of the whole body of the woman going through it. That the causes of PCOD are not known doesn’t mean that it can’t be managed. PCOD is not deadly and it doesn’t always complicate itself if you are willing to make changes in your lifestyle. It can be managed very well with lifestyle modifications and specific yoga practices.





21. Management And Prevention of Prostate Problems With Yoga
All disorders originating in the male sex organ called prostate are called prostate problems or prostate disorders. Common symptoms include difficulty passing fluids through the penis, and a prolonged stiffness or tenderness in the pelvic – rectal area. The inflammation could sometimes be due to a bacterial infection. Symptoms shouldn’t be ignored. Prostate disorders can be genetic. Modern treatment includes medications or removal of the gland, which doesn’t assure that the condition will be treated. Five practices extracted from ancient texts of yoga are mentioned in this article that shall not only manage but also prevent disorders of the prostate.
Introduction
‘Prostate problems’ include all mild, severe, acute and chronic disorders of the prostate gland. The most common prostate problems are prostatitis (an inflammation of the gland), benign prostate hyperplasia (enlargement of the gland which can be chronic or acute, bacterial or non bacterial), and prostate cancer. Let us understand what the prostate is, where it is located inside a human, and what functions it performs in the body.

The Prostate Gland
Many of our body’s functions and processes are carried out by various chemicals called enzymes, hormones & fluids. Secretion of these chemicals is a specialized function of the glands that are located throughout our body. The prostate is such a gland working as a part of the male reproductive system. It is located just below the urinary bladder and between the penis and the anus. Its main function is to produce a fluid called the prostate fluid, which acts as a medium containing and delivering sperms and semen via the penis.
Both urine and semen pass through the prostate before exiting the body. For this reason, any structural or functional abnormality in the prostate gland affects both urination and ejaculation.

Yoga Tips For Prostate Problems
Symptoms
If you have an inflammation or any abnormality in your prostate, you may be experiencing some or many of these symptoms:

Urinary incontinence, i.e. inability to pass urine
A weak flow of urine
Urination in drops
Pain or burning sensation while urinating
Pain during or after ejaculation
Unsteady ejaculation, only part of it flows out
Unable to urinate completely, some of it remains in the bladder
Too frequent urination
Abnormally odorous or tinted urine
Disturbed sleep due to need to urinate
Pain in the penis or the scrotum
Pain below abdomen
Pain near the anus
Swollen lymph nodes in the groin
Leaking fluids from the penis other than urine
Causes
Causes of prostate disorders are not clear. Sometimes a bacterial infection may cause pain and inflammation. Symptoms shouldn’t be ignored and a diagnosis should be performed to rule out the chances of cancer.

Risk factors
If prostate disorders run in your family, you are at greater risk of developing prostate problems.

Diagnosis
A physical examination is required to find the cause of the problem. A urine test, or an urodynamic test i.e. a study of how urine stream is held and released may be conducted. It tells about any blockages inside the urethral pathway. An ultrasound may be performed to see if the gland has increased in size. A blood test may be performed to check the activity level of the prostate gland.

Complications
If unrecognized and untreated, minor prostate problems can turn into other complicated diseases; like:

Chronic pelvic pain
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia
Stones in the Urinary bladder
Kidney failure
Inflammation of the prostate
Difficult sexual intercourse
Urinary tract infections that won’t go away
Treatment
Commonly used treatments include pain relieving medications, muscle relaxants for the bladder, antibiotics, diuretics and physical therapy. For more serious conditions, medications that hinder the growth of the prostate or even make it smaller are prescribed. In some circumstances, surgery is performed on the prostate to shrink it or remove a part of it. It may still grow in size and be inflamed after surgery.

Yoga For Prostate Health
Yoga has healing properties which can be utilized for treating various disorders. The following practices should be done on an empty stomach on a mat, a folded thin blanket, a carpet or on the grass. Practice 5 should not be attempted out of expert supervision.

1. Paschimottanasana
Also known as ‘forward seated bend’ this pose is great since it enhances one’s control over the movement of contents from the penis as well as the anus.

Sit on the mat with legs straight in front of you.
Keeping the spine straight, raise and straighten the arms.
Inhale while doing so.
Lean forward until you can hold or touch your toes.
Exhale.
Touch your knees with the chin.
This is the final position.
Stay in the final position for at least 10 seconds.
Perform 3 repetitions.
2. Shashankasana
This pose is an excellent pose for the male as well as the female reproductive system.

Sit on a mat or your bed by kneeling. The hips should rest on the feet.
Inhale while raising your arms straight up.
Start bending forward with the arms still extended.
Exhale, and keep leaning forward until your face touches the bed/mat.
Let the arms rest on the floor/bed.
This is the final position. Keep eyes closed and breathe normally in the final position.
Stay in this position for upto thirty minutes.
3. Bhujangasana
‘The pose of the cobra’: this pose presses against the reproductive glands in such a way that their secretions are regulated.

Lie on your stomach.
Let the arms rest on both sides of the body.
Bring the hands parallel to your chest, palms facing down.
Lift the head up, and bend the spine backwards with the stomach resting on the mat.
Support the body with the palms sharing weight. Keep the elbows slightly bent.
Inhale while doing so.
This is the final position.
Stay in the final position for 5-10 seconds.
4. Sarvangasana
Sarvangasana means the pose of the whole body. It is especially recommended for all disorders of the pelvic-rectal region.

Lie on your back.
The arms should be resting on both sides of the body.
Exhale fully.
Raise both the legs without bending them at the knees.
Support the buttocks and the back with your hands. The elbows should be resting on the mat.
Align the feet, the knees, the pelvis and the chest in a straight line perpendicular to the earth.
This is the final position. Resume normal breathing in the final position.
Practice three repetitions.
Care should be taken not to strain the neck.
5. Moola Bandha
A practice of the adept yogis that kept their reproductive systems healthy even though they were not sexually active. It involves energy modification by contracting the muscles of the reproductive glands. This practice should not be practiced by just learning it from a book. It is recommended that you learn it and practice it in the physical presence of a yoga therapist.

Conclusion
The reproductive system plays a very important role in a person’s physical as well as mental health. Disorders of the reproductive system are not often talked about freely. This worsens the condition. Discomfort in this region should not be ignored and if it is prolonged or recurrent, treatment by means of therapy should be sought. Unlike medications and surgery, yoga practices have no side effects. They are recommended for all, even if no symptoms are present; for strengthening the reproductive glands.




22. Best Yoga Practices To Help You Restore Your Perfect Body After Lockdown
Almost every person’s life and work has been transformed by – that deadly virus – which has made us all sit at our homes for more than a year now. Everything is being done online and movement and public interactions have been restricted by government authorities all over the world. We are not only missing parties and shopping but also our morning walks and gym sessions because even if we cannot go to the beach, summer is already here and we are still carrying our winter bellies with us. So many people have gained extra kilos during the lockdown. Here is how you can get back in shape with some easy yoga exercises.
Restore Body After Lockdown
Introduction
The world lifestyle is now work-from-home style right now. Even in places where restrictions have been eased, all activities and social gatherings are not freely allowed. Almost every kind of work and education is being done online. We were troubled by the lockdown imposed by the government authorities in the beginning, but now after having spent a year at home with our families, we have started enjoying staying at home and going out for only essential services and cooking new foods at home. This seems like a long summer vacation, but one thing that is not good about it is that our physical activity has reduced. Even though we are doing the cooking and cleaning at home ourselves, that’s just not enough. There is not enough walking, stair climbing, cycling, running, and roaming around in shopping malls and amusement parks.

Effect of Lockdown On Our Health
Many people have managed to balance their life and fitness by starting exercising at home. That is definitely good for a start, but that’s not enough to replace the physical activity that was done unintentionally when social movement wasn’t restricted. The lockdown life has made some people either frustrated or aspiring. Instead of making plans about what we will do when the restrictions on leisure activities and travel are lifted, we should involve ourselves in some activities that promote a state of balance in our physical and mental health. We suggest everyone should try starting a yoga regime to regain health and fitness.

Best Yoga Practices For Fitness
The following set of yoga practices should be performed as a relaxing session at preferable time of the day when the stomach is empty. A yoga session with friends or family can be even more fun and interesting.

Surya Namaskara : Surya Namaskara is a routine of asanas carefully placed in a series to balance the previous as well as the next one. It is a complete exercise in itself and is especially effective in moving the bowel mass towards the rectum. It should ideally be performed in the open when it is still cool in the morning. Some people do it as a warm up.
Tadasana : This pose loosens and stretches the spine and forms a good foundation for a beginner level yoga regime. It eases any tension built up in the back and the legs.
Tiryaka Tadasana : Poses 3 and 4 are done to amplify the effect of Tadasana and warm up the muscles of the whole body. This pose additionally stretches the body laterally, relieving stiffness and compression from all sides.
Katichakrasana : This pose tones the neck, shoulders, upper back and the waist. It relieves tension from all the body. It can be practiced many times during the day, it is especially recommended for people who suffer from mild to severe backache.
Marjari Asana : This pose improves the flexibility of the whole spine and relieves back ache and menstrual cramps in women.
Shashankasana : This pose stretches each and every joint of the spine and eases the pressure and compression in the intervertebral discs. It promotes digestion as well.
Pawanamuktasana : Also known as the pose of easing the bowels, pawanmuktasana encourages natural functioning of the digestive tract. It is recommended for relieving gas buildup from the colon. This is also what the name ‘pawana mukta asana’ means.
Paschimottanasana : Also known as forward seated bend, this asana improves blood circulation in the abdomen and enhances metabolism.
Halasana : ‘the plough pose’: This is an inverted pose, but not an advanced one. It inverts the abdominal part of the body and promotes
a healthy digestive and nervous system.
Sarvangasana : ‘the all-organ pose’: This pose benefits the whole body. This is an inverted pose, and is advanced too. If one is able to perform Sarvangasana well, there is no great need of performing other asanas. It clears the thought process, promotes mental calm and peace, enhances digestion, regulates functioning of the endocrine glands, and relieves mental tensions and stress. It gives benefits similar to complete inverted poses like Sirsasana and Salamba Sirsasana.
Anuloma Viloma Pranayama : Also known as alternate nostril breathing, Anuloma Viloma pranayama is done to purify blood channels. It is an excellent yet easy practice recommended for all individuals.  It has countless mental as well as physical benefits. It is therapeutic for people dealing with mental unrest, stress, anxiety, depression and insomnia.
Bhramari Pranayama : The practice when being done sounds like a humming bee; therefore it is also called humming bee breath. Bhramari pranayama is a practice that offers countless benefits to the nervous system. It promotes mental peace and improves neuromuscular coordination. It is excellent for people with multiple conditions. It is recommended for all individuals.
Conclusion
It is easy to gain fat while enjoying new cuisines, sitting and relaxing at home all day. But it is as easy to gain fitness when you are
dedicated and committed towards health. We all agree that health is also a concern here and a more important one than appearance. The practices described here are best done as a serial practice, in the sequence mentioned here. They not only ensure better metabolism and overall weight loss, but also promote mental peace and holistic health. These are generally safe and beneficial for everyone; still, people with health conditions, and pregnant women should always consult a yoga therapist before commencing any yoga regime.



23.  Benefits of Yoga in Preventing SAD – Stress, Anxiety & Depression
SAD – Stress, anxiety, and depression has become a common disorder, a cluster of mental conditions that affect the millenials in some or the other way. These conditions share their symptoms, causes and complications, and can also lead to each other, as well as the worsening of other physical conditions. Yoga can be beneficial in the management of such disorders and cluster conditions. This article describes what stress, anxiety and depression are, what makes them related and clustered, and some easy but effective yoga practices that can be beneficial in managing the symptoms of SAD – the new common lifestyle disorder affecting the world.
Introduction
Yoga is becoming increasingly popular across the globe because of the benefits it offers for the mind and the body. For the people who wish to see some development in their personalities and want to de-stress and reduce day-to-day tension and anxiety, a regular yoga practice can be an extremely helpful tool. Yoga is not just the physical postures but it involves practices of deep breathing, meditation and relaxation. There are countless benefits of a regular yoga programme and we are going to focus on the stress – anxiety – depression relieving ones.

yoga tips to prevent depression
Stress, Anxiety & Depression – How Are They Related?
The symptoms of stress can be very difficult to recognize. Stress is correlated with tension and anxiety. Stress, tension and anxiety become the causes of depression. The initial symptoms and changes in behavior should not be ignored, because if the signs and symptoms are ignored, these conditions can deteriorate one’s mental health. Depression can make the person suicidal. It can also worsen other unrelated physical conditions affecting the person, especially hormonal and metabolic disorders like PCOD, diabetes, thyroid, etc.

Benefits of Yoga in SAD
Yoga is especially beneficial for the management as well as prevention of diseases that are interrelated and affect many systems and processes of the body.

Yoga practice relaxes the muscles of the whole body and also stops the thought process, hence resulting in physical as well as mental relaxation. The asanas or postures relieve pain and stiffness in any parts of the body, and regular practice increases your flexibility. Certain asanas can also help remove blockages from the blood vessels and nerves.
Yoga Asanas help regulate hormones, especially those that improve the mood, and make pain less severe. Such hormones are called endorphins and they are known for their analgesic effect. Thus a yoga session can instantly lift one’s mood and make them feel good. This has a great role to play in how one responds to stressful situations and events that make them anxious.
Yoga teaches you to live in the moment and it deepens your awareness and balances all imbalances in the brain (and the mind) and also improves your understanding of things.
Higher practices of yoga make you realize and understand that attachments can be painful and then you are more willing to let them go. This is probably the best benefit of yoga.
Yoga promotes the feelings of empathy, care, contentment, joy, happiness and satisfaction. With regular practice of yoga you start loving everyone and are able to manage your thought processes and deal better with the things that make you depressed.
The cortisol hormone, or the stress hormone, which is released by the body in response to stressful events, is reduced by the regular practice of yoga.
Yoga can benefit the nervous system especially the parasympathetic nerves so that they are relaxed and the person is distressed naturally.
Yoga improves the quality of sleep in people as soon as they start practicing it. It should be noted that a disturbed sleep is the reason for many aggravated mental disorders. Therefore yoga can effectively prevent the aggravation or worsening of mental conditions and their symptoms.
After some considerable regular practice, you are able to observe your thought processes and which thoughts appear in response to which ones.
Yoga organizes the mind and adept yogis are able to control the flow of their thoughts. Such people can never even be stressed, forget being depressed.
Yoga is a set of practices that promote holistic growth of the mind, body and the soul. The benefits of yoga are countless and no list can mention them all.
Recommended Yoga Practices
1. Trataka Kriya
This practice is an extremely beneficial one for relaxing the brain, for improving concentration and strengthening the nervous system. When the person practicing Trataka Kriya is dedicated and serious, it prepares them for meditation. During the initial few sessions of practice, it is highly recommended that Trataka be done with the guidance of an expert. Trataka Kriya done properly is a relaxing practice for the subconscious and the unconscious mind. If the person experiences any incidents or visualizations, pleasant or unpleasant after beginning the practice, they should report all experiences to their guru.

Light a candle.
Place it on a surface so that when you sit with the back straight, it is at eye level.
Sit such that the flame of the candle is equidistant and in the centre of both the eyes.
Gaze at the tip of the flame without blinking.
Tears will appear in the eyes.
Close your eyes.
Watch the image of the flame with closed eyes.
Again open the eyes and gaze at the flame.
Practice twice or thrice.
After the final round, rub both palms vigorously and place them on the eyes.
Open your eyes or go to sleep or meditate.
2. Anuloma Viloma Pranayama
Qlternate Nostril Breathing : It is an extremely popular, easy yet effective pranayama. It is an excellent practice to calm the mind as well as the brain and relieve it of all stressful thoughts. It should preferably be performed outdoors; however, there is no restriction of doing it on an empty stomach.

Sit with your legs crossed.
Close your eyes gently.
The back should be straight and relaxed.
The wrists should rest on the knees in the default position.
Put the index finger and the ring finger of the right hand on the forehead on top of the nose.
Use the thumb to close the right nostril.
Inhale with the left nostril.
Close the left nostril with the ring finger.
Exhale with the right nostril.
Inhale with the right nostril and close it with the thumb.
Exhale with the left nostril.
Practice ten respirations in this way.
This is one round. Practice three rounds.
3. Bhramari Pranayama
The Humming Bee Practice : This pranayama is an excellent practice for the people who tend to overthink and get absorbed in stressful thoughts. Besides calming the mind it improves the overall functioning of the brain, hence improving all symptoms of stress, anxiety as well as depression.

Sit with your legs crossed.
The spine and the back should be straight and relaxed.
Close your eyes gently.
Gently plug both the ears with the thumbs of both hands.
Put the fingers on each eye.
Inhale deeply, and with exhalation, make a deep humming sound like a bee.
Practice thrice.
4. Shavasana
The Corpse Pose : This pose is extremely popular amongst the practitioners of yoga around the world. It is especially recommended after any asana and pranayama practice. This pose is used to multiply the benefits of all practices. It is a relaxation exercise. It can be performed on a mat or on the bed. It can also be done as a part of any guided meditation.

Lie on the back with a relaxed body.
Arms should rest on both sides in a neutral position.
Maintain the natural curve of the back.
The spine should be relaxed at all times.
Breathe deeply.
Keep observing the body’s processes.
Get up after some time or go to sleep.
Shavasana can be followed by meditation which should be performed under physician supervision of a therapist, especially when it is being done as a stress-relieving practice. It is so because the symptoms of stress, anxiety and depression remind the practitioner of any unpleasant events. Depending on the individual condition of any person meditation can also be contra-indicated for them.

Conclusion
Stress anxiety and depression are interrelated and it would be justified to say that stress, tension and anxiety are actually a series of mental conditions that lead to depression. Therefore if recognized at the earliest appearance of symptoms, stress, anxiety and depression can be treated and even prevented altogether. Yoga practices can efficiently relax the body as well as the mind. There are many options and different combinations available for individual needs of the people looking for relaxation from their stressful lives. The practices described here are generally safe for everyone, but pregnant women and people with multiple conditions should always consult a yoga therapist before beginning any regimen.




24. Takayasu’s Arteritis
Arteritis is a rare form of vasculitis where the blood vessels are inflamed and restrict normal flow of blood. Takayasu’s Arteritis is a condition of the main (and the biggest) artery in the body, the aorta. The condition is so uncommon that it is not easily recognized, especially in the initial years. This article throws light on the pathology of Takayasu’s Arteritis along with a holistic approach towards its management with yoga practices.
Takayasu’s Arteritis
Introduction
Takayasu’s Arteritis is a disease of the main artery that supplies fresh, oxygen-rich blood to the whole body. This makes it a serious condition also affecting the whole circulatory system including the blood vessels and the heart. The artery we are talking about is called ‘aorta’. Its walls get inflamed, thin and stretched, due to the cells that build up the wall are attacked by the immune system.

Function of The Aorta
The aorta originates at the left ventricle and runs through the abdominal cavity, and then divides into two branches, each supplying one of the lower extremities. The whole body depends on the aorta for receiving oxygenated blood. When the aorta is sick and not able to function well, the body starts to suffer; and the lower body and the brain are the first to notice symptoms.

Symptoms
Some or many of the following symptoms may be observed by a person developing Takayasu’s Arteritis:

Strange Sounds Heard By Stethoscope : When the heart rhythm is observed through a stethoscope, it feels abnormal.
Varying Blood Pressure : The blood pressure measured over one limb differs from that observed in another limb.
Fatigue and weakness : The body receiving a decreased oxygen amount becomes fatigued and weak easily.
Constant Pain in The Limbs : The muscles and joints becoming painful signal that something is not right with the blood supply.
Dizziness, Fainting : The brain also receives a decreased oxygen level, causing dizziness and even fainting.
Inability to Concentrate : One is not able to concentrate or be attentive.
Mild Stroke : The heart is working its best but still there is an imbalance in the blood going out and the blood coming in; sometimes mild strokes may occur in the heart.
Causes
Takayasu’s Arteritis is a rare disease, which makes its exact cause difficult to find out. It is thought to be an autoimmune disease, where the immune system mistakenly identifies as malignant and attacks the cells of the internal walls of the aorta. When a person has other autoimmune disorders, it can trigger Takayasu’s Arteritis for them. Sometimes, Takayasu’s Arteritis can run in families.

Risk Factors
Takayasu’s Arteritis mostly affects young women aged 15 to 40 years. Also, all people affected are of either Asian or Latin American origin.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of disorders of the blood vessels requires angiography i.e. scanning the blood vessels to monitor blood flow. The scanning is usually done using x-rays, computed tomography (CT scan) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Sometimes a biopsy (cutting out a sample of the inflamed tissue) is required.

Complications
Although an inflammation of the main artery is itself a threat to the whole circulatory channels, it may also lead to other more serious conditions that are also life- threatening:

Bursting artery : The walls of the arteries stretch and become thin at some points, and may burst, causing severe internal bleeding.
Heart attack : A part of the heart may stop working.
Heart Failure : The heart may stop functioning altogether.
Treatment
Drugs such as steroids and anti-inflammatory medications are used to suppress symptoms. Anti-immune medications i.e. those that block or suppress the immune system are given so that the Arteritis can be kept in its initial stage.

Yoga For Management of Takayasu’s Arteritis
This disease is caused by a confused immune system, and the peripheral nervous system plays a great role in managing the working of the immune system. Keeping in mind the necessity of more of a passive routine than active one, three practices from the ancient yoga texts are recommended for individuals with Takayasu’s Arteritis:

Nadi Shodhana Pranayama
Nadi Shodhana means ‘purification of the blood channels’. It is recommended especially to cure the disorders of the subtle cardiovascular and immune system. During the whole duration of Pranayama practice, breathing should be deep and relaxed. This practice should ideally be done in fresh air.

Sit on a mat/ carpet/ dari with the back straight and the spine relaxed.
The wrists should rest on the knees, with no strain in the elbows or the shoulders.
Close your eyes gently.
Place the index finger of any hand on the forehead and the middle finger either suspended, or with the index finger.
Place the thumb tip on one nostril. Inhale with the other nostril.
Exhale with the same nostril.
Place the ring finger on this nostril and release the other nostril held by the thumb.
Inhale deeply and exhale with the same nostril.
Practice thirty respirations in the beginning.
Shavasana
The corpse pose: it is a relaxation asana and when practiced immediately after Pranayama, yields great benefit. It may seem easy and serve no purpose at first, but practicing relaxation asanas is an essential part of immune and idiopathic disorders, because the mind plays a great role in stimulating the immune system and the endocrine system. This pose could also be practiced in bed.

Lie on the bed/ mat/ blanket.
The whole body should be relaxed.
Arms should rest on both sides of the body.
Close your eyes gently.
Breathe normally, inhaling deeply and exhaling fully.
Pay attention to the breaths. Observe each inhalation and exhalation.
Don’t interfere in natural respiration.
On instruction by the therapist/ guru, remove attention from the breath.
Open your eyes when guided.
Take a side turn and get up from the mat or go to sleep as preferred.
Yoga Nidra
Yoga Nidra is also known as ‘yogic sleep’. This practice can act as a bridge between relaxation and meditation. During Yoga Nidra, the body is reenergized as it is in actual sleep, in much less time. It is actually more beneficial than an actual sleep. Yoga Nidra should be done under the guidance of an expert or a guru. It is done by first practicing Shavasana.

Lie down in Shavasana.
Start by moving the attention towards the feet.
After a few seconds, move the attention up through the legs, the pelvis, the back, the abdomen, the arms, the thorax, the neck, to the head.
Observe the whole body.
Breathing should be regular and relaxed.
When guided, wake up and end the session.
Yoga Nidra cools down the body.
It rejuvenates the mind, the brain and the nervous system.
It is extremely beneficial for all mental, immunological and idiopathic disorders. Sometimes, when the patient cannot move nor do any other activity on their own, Yoga Nidra is the only safe and recommended treatment for a patient.
All these practices shall be the most effective when done in a series, one after the other.

Lifestyle/ Dietary Tips
Besides practicing yoga, some tips should also be followed so that the blood vessels all over the body function well and support the aorta and the heart:

Avoid packed, processed and preserved foods. They have lesser nutritional value than fresh food, and contain unhealthy amounts of fat, salt and sugar.
Consume less fried and heavy food, especially if it has been cooked commercially.
Eat more home-cooked food. The food made commercially has a lot of ingredients to enhance the taste, which decreases its nutritional value.
Eat more fresh fruits, vegetables, and nuts. They will fulfill all your requirements of minerals and vitamins.
Electrolytes: consume electrolyte-enriched drinks especially in summer, like lemonade, coconut water, etc.
Ghee: Ghee extracted from cow’s milk is an excellent tonic for the blood vessels and the heart. It should be eaten around 1 teaspoon at a time with rice, pulao, dals, khichari, etc.
Conclusion
Takayasu’s Arteritis is a rare disease which makes it difficult to detect especially if symptoms are mild. Also, the cause of the disease being immunological makes the medications used for its treatment harmful for the body in the long run, because suppressing the immune system opens the door for many diseases in the body. Hence, practicing yoga for controlling the crazy behavior of the immune system and for purifying the arteries can prove beneficial. The practices mentioned here are safe for everyone. However, they shall be more effective when practiced under the supervision of a yoga therapist and in the same series as they’re written. The tips mentioned in the last section are generic but very important to be followed. Takayasu’s Arteritis and other forms of vasculitis can be managed well with these practices.




25. Yoga For Trigeminal Neuralgia
Trigeminal neuralgia is a disease of the facial nerve supply. It is rare and its exact cause is not known. It mostly affects older adults, especially women. The episode of pain occurs and then may not return back for years; and can be triggered by emotional shock, facial treatment, and routine activities involving facial movement etc. Common treatment of nervous disorders involves potent medications and doesn’t guarantee that the condition will be cured. Yoga practices for restoration of nervous health are recommended since they are more restorative and harmonizing, and not physically or chemically invasive like medications.
Yoga Tips For Trigeminal Neuralgia
Introduction
Trigeminal neuralgia stands for a rare, extremely painful nervous condition affecting the face. This pain felt by the individual is often extremely severe and debilitating, and lasts for a short time. The term trigeminal is the specific name for a nerve originating in the cranium i.e. the top of the face, and divides and runs symmetrically on both sides of the face, with branches connecting the eyelids, the eyes, the cheeks and the nose, and then the upper and finally the lips and the lower jaw. Therefore this condition essentially affects the face. Disorders of the nervous system are extremely painful.

Symptoms
Some or many of the following symptoms may be felt by a person having trigeminal neuralgia:

An intense shooting pain
Attacks of pain for hours or even days
A sensation of burning
Constant pain in one side of the face
Pain in lips, jaws and gums
Pain in eyes and forehead
Needle or knife like pain which later spreads
Pain attacks get frequent and more severe with time
Causes And Triggers
The main cause of trigeminal neuralgia is an abnormal trigeminal nerve damaged due to central nervous disorders or pressurized or pinched nerves. Sometimes stroke and trauma relating to facial muscles or nerves can also cause trigeminal neuralgia.

Triggers
However, various other factors contribute to the aggravation of any condition or its symptoms in an individual. Those could originate from one’s lifestyle or routine or bodily constitution. Such factors are called triggers. The following factors are considered as triggers for trigeminal neuralgia:

Touching the face
Chewing gums
Eating and drinking
Brushing the teeth
Applying lotions or makeup
A cold wind
Laughing, smiling, frowning or talking
Washing the face
Slurping and sipping foods and beverages
Diagnosis
A standard diagnostic procedure for trigeminal neuralgia doesn’t exist. Cause of pain can be found out by using imaging and scanning. Sometimes, neurological tests may reveal or confirm trigeminal neuralgia.

Complications
Complications include loss of sensation in the face.

Treatment
Conventional treatment involves pain relieving strong medications that can have side effects, and surgical suppression of the trigeminal nerve. However, yoga can help ease it.

Yoga For Management of Trigeminal Neuralgia
The practices described here are generally safe for everyone. However, pregnant women and people with multiple conditions should seek guidance from a competent yoga therapist so that they can benefit from these combined practices without complicating any conditions.

Trikonasana
Known as the triangle pose, this pose enhances blood circulation and prepares the body for the effects of exercises 4 and 5.

Stand with the legs wide apart. Raise both arms at the sides of the body parallel to the ground.
Bend forwards and touch the right foot with the left hand. The torso shall rotate accordingly.
Perform on the other side similarly.
Perform 10 rounds.
Vyaghrasana
Known as the tiger pose, this is a dynamic exercise. This shall balance the chemical and physical processes of both the cerebral hemispheres.

Stand on all fours i.e. kneel and place the palms on the floor.
Keep the elbows and the knees relaxed but firm.
Inhale and drop the back to make it a downward curve. Face should be upright.
Now extend the left arm and the right leg straight and parallel to the ground.
Exhale and form an upward curve with the back. The face should be down and the chin close to the neck.
Extend the right arm and the left leg parallel to the ground.
Repeat each position ten times.
Relax the neck and the back.
Lift the palms from the mat.
Perform thirty rounds.
Padmasana
Padmasana has been used by yogis since ages to enhance functioning of the nervous system.

Sit with the legs outstretched.
Place the right foot on the left thigh and place the left foot on the right thigh.
Keep the spine straight and the whole body relaxed.
Keep breathing deeply and normally.
Sit in this pose for as long as you would like to.
Natarajasana
Named after lord Shiva, the king of all the dancers, this is an advanced pose and is extremely beneficial for balancing the nervous and physical equilibrium. It is beneficial for all disorders of the nervous system.

Stand with the feet equally sharing the weight of the body.
Hold the right big toe with the right hand.
Raise the left arm in front of the body.
Simultaneously, pull the toes of the right foot with the right hand.
Balance the whole body on the left leg.
Stay in this position for at least 10 seconds.
Release and perform on the other side.
It may take some time to balance the whole body on one leg, but it can be perfected with practice.
Anuloma Viloma Pranayama
Also known as alternate nostril breathing, Anuloma Viloma pranayama is an easy practice meant for improving the overall nervous performance.

Sit with your legs crossed.
Close your eyes gently.
The back should be straight and relaxed.
The wrists should rest on the knees in the default position.
Put the index finger and the ring finger of the right hand on the forehead on top of the nose.
Use the thumb to close the right nostril.
Inhale with the left nostril.
Close the left nostril with the ring finger.
Exhale with the right nostril.
Inhale with the right nostril and close it with the thumb.
Exhale with the left nostril.
Practice ten respirations in this way.
This is one round. Practice three rounds.
Bhramari Pranayama
This humming bee practice stimulates normal and healthy functioning of the brain and the spinal cord. It is also a great practice for meditation.

Sit with your legs crossed.
The spine and the back should be straight and relaxed.
Close your eyes gently.
Gently plug both the ears with the thumbs of both hands.
Put the fingers on each eye.
Inhale deeply, and with exhalation, make a deep humming sound like a bee.
Practice thrice.
Lifestyle/Dietary Tips
Adapting a lifestyle that cuts out the physical factors contributing to worsening of any condition multiplies the benefits of a yoga routine by several times. The following tips are extremely beneficial for everyone with any or all symptoms of a disorder relating to the nervous system.

Quit smoking.
Reduce alcohol consumption.
Consume a balanced diet.
Consume enough water (8-10 glasses everyday).
Avoid packed and processed foods.
Include more healthy fats in your diet.
Try to reduce consumption of restaurant food.
Maintain a healthy body weight.
Remain physically active throughout the day.
Do not ignore painful symptoms.
Conclusion
The nervous system is not as physical and external as the musculoskeletal system. It is even minuteer than the digestive system. What is being conveyed here is that the disorders of the nervous system are entirely different from the physical ones. The medications usually taken for nervous disorders are always more potent than any other medications and can have serious side effects that can also be life-threatening. Thankfully, yoga can manage nervous disorders very well and without any side effects, the only requirement is that of continuous supervision of a competent therapist. The practices mentioned here are not beneficial just for trigeminal neuralgia but are great preventive as well as healing practices for achieving mental equilibrium and relieving stress. Individuals practicing just for preventive and relaxative purposes may practice on their own with initial and intermittent guidance from an expert.




26. Yoga For Thyroid Health
Abstract
The thyroid gland is located below Adam’s apple just under the skin. The thyroid gland is composed of two halves connected with Isthmus. It is not visible but it can be felt. The thyroid is basically enlarged in normal conditions. It is a very important endocrine gland. It secretes two hormones into the blood. Those hormones are T3 and T4. The secretion of T3 and T4 is dependent on TSH (Thyroid-stimulating hormone). TSH is released by a master endocrine gland, the pituitary. Thus levels of T4, T3, and TSH in the blood are responsible for thyroid health. If levels of T4 and T3 are raised with suppressed TSH, then the condition is hyperthyroidism. Hypothyroidism is a condition that develops when the thyroid gland is unable to produce enough T3 and T4.

Introduction
The poor functioning of the thyroid is characterized by nervousness, irritability, inability to relax, feeling warm, heat intolerance, increased sweating, and palpitation, increased frequency of bowel movements, increased appetite, and weight loss. Symptoms of this problem are different in different patients. The cab includes tiredness, weight gain, and feeling of cold, slowing down physically and mentally, and dry skin, loss of hair, muscle weakness, puffiness, depression, hearing loss, and constipation. Women may develop heavy periods or they may lose them altogether. Hypothyroidism is very common. It affects women more frequently than men and usually at around middle age. Hypothyroidism affects approx 1 in 1000 men and 18 in 1000 women. Subclinical hypothyroidism is much more common and affects approx 28 in 1000 men and 75 in 1000 women. One of the most important facts with respect to thyroid diseases is that in most cases they are diagnosed very late so there is the presentation of various complaints related to various organ systems. Only careful examination can reveal that all these features are related t the abnormal functioning of the thyroid gland. A little yoga practice daily can add to thyroid wellness and can keep a lot of diseases away from our bodies. Yogic asana like sarvangsana, halasana, mataysana, naukasan, ushtrasana, bhujangasna and suryanamaskar are some of them. They focus on stimulating the thyroid and improving overall thyroid health. One important thing which is to be kept in mind is that remaining in the pose for the maximum time is very important. The yoga poses should be done slowly with proper procedure. The body strength and age should be kept in mind while doing yoga.

Yoga, Yoga For Thyroid Health
Following is a brief description of some Yoga procedures with proper steps –
1. Sarvangasana (Shoulder stand)
Sarvangasana is one of the most important asanas that is suggested to treat thyroid ailments. It is an inversion process and promotes blood flow to the thyroid gland.

Steps Of Sarvangasana
Lie on the back and lie flat with arms at the side of the body and palms touching the ground.
Lift the legs to ninety degrees with the help of the palm and arm with the help of arms and palm.
A person has to inhale while doing this. While bringing legs over the head person has to exhale slowly.
The use of hands is very important to fulfill the demand of Sarvangasana and balance the body. While doing this step the spine and hips should be in one line.
The chin should be tucked properly into the chest. Now slowly roll the spine down and exhale while releasing the pose. It is important to be careful about the neck and back while doing this pose.
2. Halasana
The next pose we will discuss here is Halasana which is the plow pose. Plow pose is best for thyroid health. It helps to boost the overall health of the spine also.

Steps Of Halasan
Lie on the back and place your arms alongside the body.
The palms of the person should face down.
Inhale properly while lifting the legs to ninety degrees and exhale while bringing the legs towards the floor over the head.
The last step for the accomplishment of this asan is to touch the floor with the toes.
A person should remain in this pose as he/she becomes comfortable.
On releasing the pose, inhale slowly and left the legs back to the floor over the head, and exhale slowly.
3. Matsyasana
The next yoga pose is the Matsayasna fish pose. The fish pose helps to improve thyroid gland functioning. Also, it is beneficial to manage the lifestyle disorders like stress, anxiety, and diabetes.

Steps of Matsyasana
Extend the legs in front and sit on the buttocks.
Place the palms down and hands facing towards the toes.
Draw elbows in such a way that the chest opens up, and lean back on to forearm and elbows.
Widen up the chest as much as possible and stay lifted.
Realize this yoga pose by releasing the hands and lying on the back.
Take proper deep breaths and continue the cycle.
4. Viprit Karni
The next pose we will discuss is Viprit Karni or legs up the wall pose. It is one of the best choices for patients suffering from thyroid dysfunction.

Steps of Viprit Karni
The first step is to place feet on the floor.
Exhale properly and lie on the back.
The next step is to press the wall with the legs and place the sole feet upwards.
Stay in a comfortable position and set the buttocks near the wall.
Hands can be used for body support.
Make an angle of 90 degrees with the back and head resting on the floor.
Make sure while posing you must close your eyes and breathe properly.
The time duration of this pose must be 5 -10 mins.
5. Cat-Cow Pose
This yoga pose is beneficial for thyroid patients. This pose helps to stimulate the thyroid gland. Exposing the neck and following a proper pose help to improve thyroid function.

Steps of Cat-Cow Pose
Place the wrist directly under the shoulder and place the knee under the hips.
The weight of the body should be balanced on both the legs and arms.
Inhale and exhale properly.
The next step is to look up towards the ceiling of the room or towards the sky and stretch the neck.
After that, draw the navel into the spine and exhale properly.
Continue this movement for a few seconds.
6. Bhujangasan (Cobra pose)
Bhujanagasna (Cobra pose) is helpful to promote and stimulate the thyroid gland. It is very easy to do and can be performed by a person of any age group.

Steps of Bhujangasan
Lie flat on the stomach with hands placed under the shoulder.
Palms should be on the floor and must be pressing the ground.
With the help of a slight bend, elbows inhale slowly and lift chest, head, and shoulders.
After then keep the body to the normal status step by step gradually.
Conclusion
Hyperthyroidism is a very common problem these days. It is very prevalent among societies, especially among females. It is the demand of time to avoid synthetic medicines. The herbal remedies with proper yoga are able to manage the problems like hypothyroidism. Yoga should be done under the proper guidance of a yoga expert or an ayurvedic doctor. There are ample yoga centers to get the idea of the exact poses of yoga to get appropriate benefits. Yoga is our ancient science; we must stick to our roots for a better future.




27. Yoga Asanas to Balance Tridosha (Vata, Pitta & Kapha)
Introduction
Yoga practices are the main yogic tools which assist in balancing physical stamina and boosting energy levels. It enables us to direct our attention and energy within. Ayurveda is an ancient holistic science which aids in managing all the health ailments with safe classical herbs. These classical herbs work on all the three doshas and sustain their balance. Our holistic science uses these doshas to explain the different energies we experience in our daily lives. So in this write up, we are going to see how yogasana can be used to keep our ayurvedic energetics in balance. Let’s have a look!

1. Vata Dosha
Vata Doshas

Vata is one of the tridoshas present in our body. Its imbalance escorts the body into characteristics like Cold, Mobility, Buoyancy, etc. Yoga practices in this type of predominance will help in reestablishing the qualities of Warmness, Equilibrium, Firmness, Tranquillity, and Sustenance. People with Vata imbalance will end up with diseases like Arthritis, Insomnia, Anxiety, Headache, Digestion issues, Constipation, etc. Asanas that have a calming nature and strengthen the lower back are more appropriate for Vata dosha.

Uttanasana
Balasana
Paschimottanasana
Supta Virasana
Dhanurasana
Suryanamaskar
2. Pitta Dosha
Pitta Doshas

Pitta is another dosha or energy which causes things to develop and transform. When Pitta dosha is in a balanced form then it promotes Understanding, Intelligence, Good Skin Complexion, etc. But its imbalance leads to Anger, Intolerance, Disturbed Sleep, Heartburn, and Insensitivity to Food. Yoga asanas that reduce tension from the abdomen are very effective in balancing Pitta dosha. Meditation should be primarily practiced along with the following yoga asanas:-

Trikonasana
Bhujangasana
Dhanurasana
Chandra namaskar
Sheetali pranayama
3. Kapha Dosha
Kapha Doshas

Kapha is made up of two elements i.e Earth and Water which is also known as the Energy of Cohesion. It helps us to unite with others and keep things together. The Balanced form of Kapha promotes Love, Calmness, and Stability but its imbalance leads to Inertia, Depression, Lethargy, Water Retention, Sinus Congestion, and Bloating. Yogasana, which is Strong and Stimulates Warmness, and causes Sweating, is the best way to rebalance Kapha. Standing postures with Combined Stretching and Movement are good.

Ustrasana
Bandhasana
Adho mukha svanasana
Surya Namaskar
Pranayama





28. Yoga For Managing Urinary Tract Infections
Urinary tract infections or UTIs are microbial infections of the urinary tract in humans. Women get more urinary tract infections than men do. The infection could be more or less severe depending on the location of the manifestation of the infection. Symptoms include burning sensation and pain, and a changed appearance of urine, and urine that is accompanied by a strong odor. UTIs are common and could be recurring, severe and even life-threatening if preventive measures are not taken. Prevention usually includes medications and hygiene. This article recommends some yogic practices that effectively help manage ongoing infections and some practices that help prevent further ones.
Introduction
On an average, a person urinates around 5-7 times a day, with a total of at least 800 ml of urine eliminated per day. Now imagine if it happens more frequently, and with a burning sensation every time. This is a characteristic feature of the condition we are discussing – urinary tract infections. Urinary tract infections or UTIs are not only painful, annoying and uncomfortable, but they can also affect the kidneys adversely if care is not taken to treat them at the earliest. Urinary tract infections can be more or less severe depending upon the part of the urinary tract that is affected. Lower tract infections are characterized by mostly external symptoms while an infection that has spread to the upper part of the tract causes more severe symptoms. Let us first look at which organs ‘upper’ and ‘lower’ sections of the urinary tract include.

Yoga Tips For Urinary Tract Infections
The Human Urinary Tract
The human urinary tract consists of the kidneys, the ureters, the urinary bladder and the urethra. The kidneys are two hand-sized organs located symmetrically in the lower abdominal region with two thin tubes called ureters, exiting the kidneys and connecting them with the urinary bladder. The urinary bladder is a muscular pouch with a sphincter at its bottom, and the urethra, the opening of the bladder. The kidneys and the ureters are considered the upper part i.e. the upper urinary tract, while the urinary bladder, the urethra, and the urinary sphincter are considered the lower urinary tract. In males the prostate also takes part in health and disease of the lower urinary tract.

Symptoms
The following signs confirm an ongoing infection of the urinary tract:

Burning sensation: when urine streams sexist the body it feels like it is burning the skin that it touches. This feeling could be prolonged i.e. can be felt even when one is not urinating.
Frequent urination: urination is frequent.
Lesser urine volume: small volumes of urine are discarded many times a day.
Blood in urine: it could be a sign that the infection is getting severe.
Opaque urine: urine could appear whitish.
Pungently odorous urine: the odor of urine feels abnormal.
Painful urination: urine stream damages the skin around the urethral opening due to frequent urination and increased concentration of the urine.
Internal pain with urination: the inside of the urinary tract may also feel painful while, before or after urination.
If the infection could not be managed in time, it spreads to the upper organs, which is a more severe condition and has the following symptoms in addition to those mentioned above:

Fever: the body’s natural immune response towards foreign particles having entered the body.
Fatigue and body ache: a part of natural immune response.
Vomiting and nausea: a part of natural immune response, indicating severe infection.
Causes: Lifestyle, Physical
Various factors contribute to the development of any condition in an individual. Those could originate from one’s lifestyle or routine, or be triggered by their anatomical and physiological constitution. On this basis we see causes of a disease as lifestyle factors or physical factors.

Lifestyle factors
Bacterial/ Viral invasion from bacteria/ viruses present in improperly washed underwear, public toilet seats etc.
Sexual transmission of these microbes is also possible especially when protection is not used.
Holding urination not only irritates the skin of the urethral opening but also makes the urethral muscle lose its tone which in long term reduces the effectiveness of the local immune mechanism present at the urethral opening.
Physical Factors
Weak immunity: an ineffective or sluggish immune response allows growth of environmental bacteria inside the lower urinary tract.
Other infections: simultaneous other infections such as sexually transmitted ones, or overgrowth or lack of healthy natural microbes can also cause other UTIs.
Risk Factors
Some factors decide the severity and susceptibility of a condition affecting a particular individual. Those factors are:

Anatomical susceptibility: women have a wider and complex urethral opening where many glands are present in close proximity to each other. Therefore infections are not only more likely in women but they also stay for longer.
Sexual activity: being sexually active increases one’s chance of contracting urinary tract infections since it exposes them to the additional microbes that their partner is carrying.
Menopause: the healthy vaginal bacteria cease in amount and activity after menopause since the woman is no longer fertile. This puts her at an increased risk of getting UTIs since the protective layer present at the compound urethral-vaginal opening is not as effective after menopause.
Previous UTIs: UTIs may keep visiting you frequently because the first one may not have been treated or eliminated completely; it was possibly just suppressed.
Diagnosis
Urine tests are most common and effective to check for presence of microbes in the urine sample. Urine tests for UTIs are essentially done on a sample that was collected midstream, to avoid the microbes that were present around the skin that were washed by the initial flow of urine.

Complications
Chronic UTIs
Kidney damage
Pregnancy complications
Blood infection
Treatment
Conventionally, antibiotic and antiviral medications are used to eliminate ongoing infections depending on the microbe that has caused infection. However, they disturb the natural and beneficial composition of healthy bodily microbes too, and result in other infections or imbalances such as yeast overgrowth. Therefore, a yoga routine is recommended for preventing as well as minimizing infections.

Yoga For Preventing Urinary Disorders
These practices strengthen the urinary tract and boost the efficiency of the local and beneficial microbes present naturally at the urethral and anal openings. They should be practiced as a part of regular yoga routine and compulsorily if one has had UTIs in the past. These can be done at a small gap after meals.

1. Malasana
Stand on the mat/ floor/ carpet/ with the feet slightly wider than normal.
Join both hands in a Namaste with a deep inhalation.
With a steady exhalation, slowly squat down in a wide squat.
The toes should point outwards.
Fit the elbows inside the knees.
The forearms should be parallel to the ground.
The back should be relaxed and straight.
You can now close your eyes.
This is the final position.
Resume normal breathing.
Stay in this position for 7-10 seconds
The knees and the elbows should press against each other in the final position.
Release the pose and repeat five times.
2. Vajrasana
Kneel on a thick mat/ folded blanket/ carpet or your bed.
Keep the feet close together with the soles upwards.
Lower the buttocks and place them snugly between the feet.
Keep the spine straight.
Put the palms on the knees and close the eyes.
No part of the body should be strained, tense or uncomfortable.
Practice deep breathing.
Sit in Vajrasana like this for around thirty minutes.
3. Gomukhasana
Sit on your mat/ bed with the legs outstretched.
Lift the right leg and bend the left leg and slide it under the right leg.
Bend the right leg too and place it over the bent left leg.
Both feet should be at opposite sides of the body.
Place both feet as close to the thighs of the opposite legs as possible.
Keep the spine straight yet relaxed.
Place the left hand on the right knee.
Place the right hand on the left hand.
Close the eyes.
Practice deep breathing.
After a few respirations raise both arms to the sides.
Bend the left arm such that the hand rests behind the right back.
Bend the right arm similarly and place the right hand on the left hand.
Hold both hands with each other.
This is the final position. Stay like this for at least a minute in the beginning.
Release the hands. Practice 5-6 times.
Yoga For Eliminating An Ongoing UTI
These practices shall prevent the spread of an ongoing infection and minimize its severity. It can also eliminate it completely. Practice 1 should be done several times a day whereas practice 2 should be done on an empty stomach only.

1. Naman Pranamasana
Sit on the mat/ carpet/ bed in vajrasana as the starting position.
Hold both legs just above the ankles.
Start rising and bend forward to place the forehead on the mat/ carpet/ bed.
If required place a folded towel or a small pillow under the face.
The pelvis shall remain suspended in the air; it won’t touch the mat/ ground.
Bring the chin close to the chest.
This is the final position.
Stay like this for 5-10 seconds practicing normal breathing.
Release the legs and place the hands on the mat with the arms extended.
Glide backwards without getting up and rest the buttocks on the feet.
Repeat three to five times.
2. Vasti Kriya
The person should be adept in uddiyana bandha.
Wash the whole perianal region with mild soap and water.
Fill a tub of clean water at room temperature or slightly more than that.
Squat so low that the urethral opening is dipped in the water.
Practice uddiyana bandha.
Practice thrice.
Wipe the water and dry the skin before putting on clothing.
Practice Shavasana. Perform as many times a week as recommended by your therapist.
Lifestyle/Dietary Tips
Adapting a lifestyle that cuts out the physical factors contributing to worsening of any condition multiplies the benefits of a yoga routine by several times. The following tips are extremely beneficial for everyone with any or all symptoms of a disorder relating to excretory health:

Enough hydration: drinking enough (around 8-10 glasses) water per day reduces the concentration and the burning sensation caused by urination within an hour, and also reduces the chances of contracting infections in the long term.
Hygiene maintenance: practices like wearing clean and breathable underwear, avoiding dirty restrooms and washing the anus rather than wiping it, are extremely helpful in not only preventing but also easing ongoing UTIs.
Hygiene after and during intercourse: using lubricated condoms during intercourse and urinating just after the intercourse prevents UTIs for both males and females.
Balanced diet: a diet balanced in all respects i.e. having all macro and micronutrients in the required amounts is essential for the body’s immune system to function well and deal with microbial infections.
Conclusion
Although a UTI is less of a disease but more of a lifestyle disorder – and a very uncomfortable one; but it doesn’t mean that it can be managed only with strong medications that could disturb the natural constitution of the body’s flora. The yoga practices described here are not only preventive of UTIs but should also be practiced as personal hygiene regularly. However, any practices that have the word ‘kriya’ in their name should ideally be begun under supervision of a yoga therapist. Also, if the individual has multiple conditions, they should tell this to their therapist before the commencement of any regime. The tips suggested here are effective and enough but aren’t all-inclusive. One should take all possible care of their hygiene especially regarding the sex organs.





29. Yoga Tips For Varicose Veins
Varicosities or ‘varicose veins’ is a condition of the veins where the veins are full of surplus blood circulation that makes them swollen and enlarged. They can also be painful and itchy. Most of the time, varicose veins appear in the legs. They are a sign that the veins are not able to release blood properly hence they retain it which makes them appear blue or purple when seen through the skin. This article mentions some yoga practices that effectively ease all discomfort caused by varicose veins and reduces their severity. These practices can also prevent varicose veins over time.
Introduction
‘Varicose’ is defined as the swollen, weak, twisted and thinned-walled characteristic of a vein most commonly in the legs. The varicosity of a vein or a group of veins is often considered a consequence of poor circulation.

Veins are a part of the cardiovascular or the circulatory system, whose function is to circulate nutrients, oxygen and water via blood to all the cells of the body. The supply of blood, oxygen and nutrients is done through the arteries. The collection of residual gases and waste is done through the veins. Therefore, when the veins are not able to function properly, it is not entirely the heart’s fault and the structure of the veins also plays an important role in it. The veins are sometimes dilated and their walls are thinned and weakened which makes them retain blood and not send it to the heart completely.

Because the veins carry blood that is devoid of oxygen and nutrients, it appears dark blue/ purple /green or blackish in color as seen through the skin.

Varicose Veins
Symptoms
The following physical signs tell that a person’s veins are developing varicosity:

Dark blue or purple veins in the legs
Veins that appear to be tangled with each other
Itching where the veins are varicose
Darkening of the skin in that body part
Pain and heaviness in the legs
Swelling and redness
A feeling of throbbing in the legs
Causes: Lifestyle, Physical
Weakened veins are the primary cause of varicose veins. Various other factors contribute to their development as an individual. Those could originate from one’s lifestyle or routine, or be triggered by their anatomical and physiological constitution. On this basis we see causes of a disease as lifestyle factors or physical factors.

Physical Factors
Weak vascular system
Weak muscles all over the body
Hormonal relaxation of smooth muscle in the body
Blood viscosity above normal
Imbalance in blood constituents
Lifestyle Factors
Smoking
Sitting or standing for long durations
Not enough physical activity
High cholesterol
Obesity
Risk Factors
Some factors decide the severity and susceptibility of a condition affecting a particular individual. Varicose veins are more likely to affect:

The elderly : aging brings with it degenerates all cells and tissues of the body, which include the veins and their walls; making the elderly develop varicosity of veins easily.
Habitual smokers : smoking has extremely adverse effects on the whole cardiovascular system.
Women: hormonal changes at the onset and cessation of menstruation, and pregnancy hormones tend to affect the veins in women, making them more susceptible for developing varicose veins.
Pregnant women : Hormones that relax muscles in the whole body during pregnancy with the added weight of the baby and uterine muscle, fluid and tissue, put women at an increased risk of developing varicose veins in women.
People with a family history of varicose veins.
People who sit or stand for long durations, especially if it is a part of their job.
Overweight and obese people, for the simple reason of the legs bearing more pressure and weight than they should have to.
Diagnosis
Usually a physical examination of the legs is enough for diagnosing the condition, including swelling and pain. In some cases where there is a possibility of blood clotting, ultrasonic scanning may be used to check for any blood clots.

Complications
Varicose veins may develop blood clots that are significantly large and also ulcers. If the veins dilate too much, they may burst and bleed profusely.

Treatment
Treatment usually comprises lifestyle changes and compression stockings to prevent blood flow and accumulation in the veins. Some yoga poses are specifically therapeutic for varicose veins.

Yoga Practices For Easing Varicose Veins
The following exercises reduce blood accumulation in the legs instantly and in the long term strengthen the veins and restore their health. These should be done on an empty stomach.

1. Pada Sanchalanasana
Lie down on a mat/ carpet/ folded blanket/ your bed.
Keep the arms at both sides of the body.
Keeping the legs straight, raise them simultaneously until they are perpendicular to the ground.
Maintain the natural curve of the back.
Bend the legs at the knees and start a cycling motion with the legs.
Maintain a slow and gentle motion.
Keep the body relaxed throughout.
Practice normal breathing during the practice.
Do this for a total count of 100.
2. Halasana
Lie on your back on the mat/ carpet.
Raise both the legs together, supporting them with the hands if needed.
With an exhalation place both the feet together on the mat/ carpet/ bed behind the head.
Support the back with the hands.
The legs shall be straight.
This is the final position. Resume normal breathing in the final position.
Stay in this position for around 10 seconds.
Relax and repeat thrice.
3. Sarvangasana
Lie on your back on the mat/ carpet.
Raise both legs simultaneously, until the feet, the knees, the buttocks and the chest all come in line with each other.
Do so while exhaling.
Support the body with the hands.
The elbows shall rest on the mat/ carpet.
This is the final position. Resume normal breathing in the final position.
Stay in this position for at least 5-7 seconds.
Practice thrice.
Lifestyle/Dietary Tips
Adapting a lifestyle that cuts out the physical factors contributing to worsening of any condition multiplies the benefits of a yoga routine by several times. The following tips are extremely beneficial for everyone with any or all symptoms of a disorder relating to the blood vessels in the lower extremities:

Wear loose and breathable clothes.
Do not stand or sit in the same position for long.
If you have to, then take small breaks in between to stretch the limbs.
Keep the feet at a raised level while sleeping.
Consume enough water (8-10 glasses a day).
Consume a nutrient rich diet.
Limit or quit smoking.
Maintain a healthy body mass.
Conclusion
Varicose veins respond positively to therapeutic lifestyle modifications and yoga intervention. A reduction in the severity can be felt within a week of beginning the programme described above. Varicose veins can be strengthened by these yoga practices so that their varicosity decreases, or at least doesn’t increase with age. These practices are safe for everyone. However, individuals with multiple conditions and pregnant women should consult a yoga therapist before beginning any yoga regime since multiple conditions require a customized regime for management of all those conditions without aggravating any. Healthy individuals can practice these as a part of their regular exercises.




30. Enhancing Vision With Trataka Kriya And Ayurvedic Herbs
Vision is the process of image formation. Healthy vision depends on the health of each organ involved in the process, i.e. the eye, the concerned part of the brain, and the nerves connecting the eye and the brain. Like any other process of the body, vision can be defected too, due to a structural or functional abnormality in the body. This article covers some aspects of vision, such as its mechanism, its defects and their correction, and corrective measures for defective vision based on Yoga and Ayurveda.
Yoga Tips For Vision Enhancement
Introduction
Facilitated by the eye, vision is nature’s gift to man. The eye is an intricate structure located close to the brain. This gives the eye not only a place in the ‘special senses’ but also gives it importance in yoga physiology because of its close proximity to important chakras located in the head. Yogis have greatly emphasized the role of normal and healthy vision in activation of psychic vision and meditation. They say that if the physical body is not free of impurities, especially the sense organs, then these impurities shall keep hindering the path of meditation. Therefore cleansing practices have been given great importance in the ancient yoga manuals. Trataka is one of those cleansing practices.

The Mechanism of Vision in Humans
The eye is a ball divided into anterior and posterior half by the eye lens, which is held in place by the ciliary muscle. The anterior half is covered by a hemispherical muscular membrane, called the cornea, which is refractive and is responsible for the primary convergence of incident light onto the eye lens. The posterior half is filled with a jelly that maintains pressure inside the eyeball, with a screen lying as the posterior end where images are formed. This screen is called the retina. Light reflected from all objects falls at the eye lens via the cornea and it is converged to form an image on the retina. Vision is considered healthy/ normal when all images are formed on the retina regardless of the distance of the object from the eye lens.

Vision Defects And Correction Methods
As far as the physical vision is concerned, it can get deviated from its healthy state, making the person unable to see either far object clearly, or near object clearly, or the object images can vertically be distorted. These conditions are together called vision defects. They are corrected using optical lenses.

Myopia: also known as short-sightedness, this defect causes the person to face difficulty seeing far objects clearly. The farthest range of clear vision of a normal eye is considered to be infinity; but for a myopic eye this range is much less than infinity. The lens of a myopic eye forms an image in front of the retina. Myopia is corrected using concave lenses, with a focal length such that the image is formed exactly on the retina.
Hypermetropia: also known as far-sightedness, this defect causes the person to face difficulty seeing near objects clearly. The nearest range of clear vision in a normal eye is usually 25 centimeters, also known as the least distance of distinct vision, but for a hypermetropic eye, this distance increases more than the normal value. The lens of a hypermetropic eye forms an image behind the retina. Hypermetropia is corrected using convex lenses, with a focal length such that the image is formed exactly on the retina.
Presbyopia: this is an age-related defect where the eye muscles lose their elasticity and functionality. Thus the elderly see near some objects blurred. A combination of myopia and hypermetropia can also affect the elderly where combine lenses are used whose upper half is concave and lower half is convex.
Other Defects: other defects such as blurred vision, distorted vision & corneal defects are also corrected using suitable lenses or surgery.
Introduction to Trataka
‘Trataka’ means a constant gaze. Trataka is an ancient practice the mention of which is found in various forms of yoga and tantra. Although these days we use these practices for their therapeutic effects, their effects are beyond the physical ones. It is a practice that has effects deeper than the material body. On the physical level, it is used as a cleansing practice for the eyes, and on the deeper levels it develops concentration and has other intellectual, psychic and spiritual effects.

This extract (2.32) from the Hatha Yoga Pradipika of Swatmarama simply tells the essential technique of Trataka:

“निरीक्षेत् निश्चलादृशा सूक्ष्मलक्ष्यं समाहितः।अश्रुसम्पातपर्यन्तम् आचार्यैः त्राटकं स्मृतम्।।”

“With a steady sight, look at a point object. Do so until tears appear. This is simply called Trataka as defined by the experts.”

Here, a point object is not a particle-sized or a pin-point sized object. Interestingly, Optics too considers the Sun, the Moon, a dot or a flame as point objects. The same criterion applied for the selection of the Trataka object.

Preparation
Choose a room that has the minimum furnishings and has efficient curtains or other ways of light blocking. Close the door and the windows and turn off all lights.
The room shouldn’t have air currents circulating in it even with closed doors and windows.
Find a table/ stand that is almost as long as your thorax, you will place your Trataka object on this table/ stand.
You will need a diya or a candle as the Trataka object. The wick shouldn’t be too long.
Place the diya/ candle on the chosen table.
Spread a comfortable mat in front of the table/ stand.
There shouldn’t be too many disturbances from household noise or someone knocking your door in between the practice.
Technique
Sit on the mat in any easy seated pose.
Light the diya/ candle.
Keep the head and the spine straight yet relaxed.
The diya/ candle should be placed at a distance not too away from your least distance of distinct vision (which is 25 cm for most individuals).
Close your eyes. Relax the facial muscles, and then relax the whole body.
Observe the bodily sensations and movements. Ease, if any part is strained such that you won’t be able to tolerate it for the upcoming few minutes.
Now the body shall not move throughout the practice.
Open the eyes and fix them on the tip of the flame.
Do not blink, do not strain either.
Within some time whole awareness shall collect at the eyes and the body will feel numb.
Try not to think of other things or just anything.
When tears appear, gently close your eyes.
Watch the image of the flame inside your head with closed eyes.
Try to keep this image steady even though it will try to move.
The image shall fade. When this happens, open the eyes again, and repeat the practice.
Do so thrice or four times in one session.
At the end of the last round, you can choose to keep sitting, get up or lie down.
If you wish to get up: Before opening the eyes, rub both palms together vigorously until warmth is produced in them, and place them on the eyes. Open the eyes while they’re still covered by the palms.
Blow the flame off to prevent any accident.
Benefits
Trataka has numerous benefits. The physical benefits start appearing with the first session itself, and the subtler ones shall be felt by the individual as they explore the deeper aspects of the practice. As implied from this extract (2.33) from the Hatha Yoga Pradipika of Swatmarama:

“मोचनं नेत्ररोगाणां तन्द्रादीनां कपाटकम्।यत्नतस्त्राटकं गोप्यं यथा हाटकपेटकम्।। “

“Trataka eases and ceases all eye disorders, and it prevents laziness, lethargy, inactivity, drowsiness, dizziness and hence improves focus. (It has more benefits that are beyond physical body) and therefore, it should be kept secret and protected as someone would protect their jewels”.

The beauty of the ancient texts lies within the Sanskrit couplets in them, where there are several hidden and implied meanings that are not understood by just reading the literal meanings of the terms. In the above stated extract too, a major part has been impliedly conveyed which we’ll try to expand. Effects of Trataka practice are listed below in order of their appearance with gradual practice:

Trataka clears vision instantly.
It activates the lachrymal secretion which could have been dormant or following another course, causing congestion.
Trataka hence eases congestion and treats dry eyes.
It eases tension in the sensory and motor nerves, and muscles of the eye.
It balances the nervous equilibrium between the two cerebral hemispheres.
It strengthens memory and improves concentration.
It activates energy in the central chakra of the skull.
It eases mental stress and tension and clears thoughts that trigger stress and tension.
It makes the individual achieve thoughtlessness.
It restores healthy vision.
It activates supernatural vision.
It prepares the individual for progressing to deeper stages of yoga.
Precautions And Contraindications
The yogic techniques prescribed for cleansing and strengthening of the orifices of the body should not be performed by just consulting a book or any instructions that have not been communicated personally, because the non-personal instruction can never convey the right technique as required and suitable for the individual’s condition and limitation. The following care should be considered if one wishes to get initiated in Trataka:

Individuals who wear prescription eyeglasses or lenses shall remove their glasses or lenses before commencing the practice, if the Trataka object lies within their range of least distance of distinct vision.
Alternative techniques (discussed in the next section) may be prescribed by the therapist after diagnosing the individual’s requirements. The Trataka object shall be chosen as guided by the therapist.
Individuals with severe conditions such as glaucoma shall not begin any practice on their own.
No individual shall choose the daytime Sun as the Trataka object.
Individuals who have had seizures and similar nervous conditions can practice Trataka, but the Trataka object shall be decided by the therapist.
Time of practice shall be chosen as per the individual’s condition of health (or disease).
The individual shall not strain the eyes in order to focus on the Trataka object since strain shall compromise the benefits of the practice and may even harm vision.
The individual shall develop the ability to gaze constantly over time. They shall not force their eyes open in the initial days of practice.
Alternative Techniques
The chosen Trataka object, time and duration of practice, purpose of practice, the sequence of practices and the individual’s condition makes Trataka a versatile practice that can be done by many different techniques.

Black Dot : Trataka object can be a black dot placed on a wall or a screen. The background should provide sharp contrast to the dot. It should ideally be done in natural daylight rather than in electrically lit rooms.
Full Moon : The full Moon is a great choice for a Trataka object since it has all the positive and balancing qualities that a Trataka object should have. Epileptics, however, shall never choose the Moon as their Trataka object.
Sun : The deep red rising and setting Sun can be used as a Trataka object, but care should be taken to do so within a short window of time.
Ayurvedic Herbs For Healthy Vision
Vision depends on the ayurvedic and genetic constitution of the individual. Extra care should be taken if one’s parents or grandparents have had defective vision. Some ayurvedic herbs can restore ayurvedic balance and thus prevent as well as correct defective vision to some extent.

Amla (Phyllanthus emblica) : Known as Indian gooseberry worldwide and as amla throughout India, this fruit is a small packet of enormous nutrition. It is extremely good for preventing degenerative vision defects. It can be consumed fresh, in salsas, chutneys, as juice, candied or pickled, and also as a powder when dried.
Bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus) : This look-alike of American blueberry is also a kind of blueberry, but it is grown and used for its medicinal properties. Its powder is extensively used in correcting defective vision and poor night vision.
Triphala : This ayurvedic combination of Amalaki (Phyllanthus emblica), Bibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica) and Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) is a magical formulation that restores all ayurvedic imbalances in the body. It is especially recommended for correcting vision defects. It is a powder easily available at local herb stores.
Conclusion
Vision defects are partially contributed to by faulty lifestyle but the major factor is still the individual’s ayurvedic body constitution and their genetic makeup. Therefore supplementing nutrition with ayurvedic herbs is a great way to rule out nutritional deficiencies causing poor eye health. Trataka can be performed after receiving due guidance and even demonstration by a competent yoga therapist because seeking guidance shall eliminate chances of complications that may arise if the individual has some conditions that could interfere with the beneficial effects of a normal Trataka practice. Hence defective vision can be restored to healthier states with the help of Yoga and Ayurveda.


